DRAFT VERSION JUNE 20, 2021
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 5/2/11
NO FLARES FROM GAMMA-RAY BURST AFTERGLOW BLAST WAVES ENCOUNTERING SUDDEN
CIRCUMBURST DENSITY CHANGE
ILANA GAT1, HENDRIK VAN EERTEN1, ANDREW MACFADYEN1
1 Center for Cosmology and Particle Physics, Physics Department, New York University, New York, NY 10003
Draft version June 20, 2021
ABSTRACT
Afterglows of gamma-ray bursts are observed to produce light curves with the ﬂux following power law
evolution in time. However, recent observations reveal bright ﬂares at times on the order of minutes to days.
One proposed explanation for these ﬂares is the interaction of a relativistic blast wave with a circumburst
density transition. In this paper, we model this type of interaction computationally in one and two dimensions,
using a relativistic hydrodynamics code with adaptive mesh reﬁnement called RAM, and analytically in one
dimension. We simulate a blast wave traveling in a stellar wind environment that encounters a sudden change
in density, followed by a homogeneous medium, and compute the observed radiation using a synchrotron
model. We show that ﬂares are not observable for an encounter with a sudden density increase, such as a
wind termination shock, nor for an encounter with a sudden density decrease. Furthermore, by extending our
analysis to two dimensions, we are able to resolve the spreading, collimation, and edge effects of the blast wave
as it encounters the change in circumburst medium. In all cases considered in this paper, we ﬁnd that a ﬂare
will not be observed for any of the density changes studied.
1. INTRODUCTION
Since the discovery of gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), there
has been increasing interest in their properties and behav-
ioral characteristics. Currently, GRBs are thought to be the
result of either a massive star collapsing (Woosley 1993; Mac-
Fadyen & Woosley 1999) or compact binary systems merging
(Eichler et al. 1989), launching a collimated relativistic blast
wave into the circumburst medium. The blast wave sweeps
up, shocks, and accelerates the circumburst electrons as the
circumburst medium slows the blast wave itself. The shock-
accelerated electrons produce synchrotron radiation as they
interact with small scale magnetic ﬁelds behind the shock
front (e.g., Paczynski & Rhoads 1993; Katz 1994; Sari et al.
1996; Wijers et al. 1997; Wijers & Galama 1999; Panaitescu
& Kumar 2002). This radiation creates an afterglow signal
that can be observed for days at X-ray and optical frequencies
and for even longer time scales at radio frequencies.
Much research has been done to understand the blast wave
that causes the observed afterglow signal, and the evolution of
the ultra-relativistic early time and non-relativistic late time
phases of the blast wave are known: they can be described
by the self-similar Blandford-McKee (BM: Blandford & Mc-
Kee 1976) and the Sedov-Von Neumann-Taylor (ST: Sedov
1959; von Neumann 1961; Taylor 1950) solutions respec-
tively. Such analytical solutions describe the radial outﬂow of
a collimated blast wave at early times, as well as the spherical
outﬂow of the blast wave at late times. Yet there are currently
no exact analytical solutions for the intermediate phases of
the evolution, although there are approximations (e.g., Pe’er
2012; Huang et al. 1999 for the spherical case), describing
the dynamics of the deceleration and spreading of the blast
wave. The spreading of the blast wave as it decollimates has
been treated analytically (Rhoads 1999; Granot & Piran 2012)
and recently modeled computationally (Zhang & MacFadyen
2009; Wygoda et al. 2011; van Eerten & MacFadyen 2012;
van Eerten et al. 2012; De Colle et al. 2012).
Along with studying the evolution of the blast wave itself,
much research has been devoted to studying the shape of the
emitted light curve. The general model of the afterglow light
curve is a smooth curve with the slope being a function of the
density of the surrounding medium as well as the power-law
slope of the distribution of the accelerated electron population
at the shock front. Recent observations, though, have shown
this model is not always sufﬁcient. Flares in X-ray afterglows
were ﬁrst detected with BeppoSAX (Frontera et al. 2000) and
once Swift was launched in 2004, it became clear that after-
glow ﬂares (Burrows et al. 2005; Nousek et al. 2006; O’Brien
et al. 2006) as well as optical variability in the early stages of
the burst (Stanek et al. 2007) were a common occurrence.
To explain the causes of these ﬂares, researchers have be-
gan to study the interaction of a blast wave with complex
structures such as wind termination shocks (Dai & Lu 2002;
Ramirez-Ruiz et al. 2005; Pe’er & Wijers 2006; Eldridge
et al. 2006; Nakar & Granot 2007), clumps (Ramirez-Ruiz
et al. 2005), magnetic shocks (Yost et al. 2003), collisions
with nearby star environments (Mimica & Giannios 2011),
and massive shells (Mesler et al. 2012). Others have specu-
lated the ﬂares could be caused by slower ejecta catching up
with the blast wave, reenergizing it at later times (e.g., Rees
& Meszaros 1998; Kumar & Piran 2000; Sari & Mészáros
2000), from delayed magnetic dissipation (Giannios 2006),
or from magnetic regulation of the accretion ﬂow (Proga &
Zhang 2006). Alternatively, it has been theorized that ﬂaring
is a result of late time engine activity (Falcone et al. 2007;
Perna & MacFadyen 2010; Margutti et al. 2011) which, for
example, is from multiple shells being ejected (Maxham &
Zhang 2009; Vlasis et al. 2011), mass inﬂux (Metzger et al.
2008; Lee et al. 2009), or fragmentation in the collapsing stel-
lar core (King et al. 2005) or accretion disk (Perna et al. 2006;
Masada et al. 2007). There are many hypotheses of the cause
of the rebrightening in the light curve (see also Ioka et al.
2005), and in this paper, we discuss the hypothesis of a tran-
sition in circumburst medium from a stellar wind to a homo-
geneous medium (e.g., an interstellar medium (ISM)), includ-
ing wind termination shocks as well as sudden lower density
regions. These types of density changes have been numeri-
arXiv:1304.3415v2  [astro-ph.HE]  19 Jul 2013
2
cally studied in much detail and are from the formation of a
wind reverse shock (e.g., van Marle et al. 2006; Eldridge et al.
2006).
Pe’er and Wijers (PW: Pe’er & Wijers 2006) theorized that
the ﬂares were the result of the blast wave radiation interfer-
ing with the reverse shock of the stellar wind, causing a tran-
sition period in the light curve. However, Nakar and Granot
(NG: Nakar & Granot 2007) were unable to reproduce PW’s
results using one dimensional simulations and argued that the
ﬂares are not caused by a wind termination shock nor a den-
sity jump in a uniform external medium. NG concluded that
the origin of the ﬂares in afterglow light curves has still yet to
be discovered. van Eerten et al. (2009) reconciled this discrep-
ancy by explaining NG was correct in stating a wind termina-
tion shock does not cause rebrightening, although the results
of PW correctly follow from their model assumptions. Mesler
et al. (2012) revisited this idea of a wind termination shock but
instead of one shock, added higher density shells that can re-
alistically be expected to occur, and claimed that ﬂares were
observed as the blast wave encountered these higher density
shells.
In this paper, we address a number of circumburst medium
interaction scenarios not previously explored. We also extend
the analysis from one dimension to two dimensions to under-
stand the effects of spreading of a collimated ﬂow at the shock
front which was not previously considered. Speciﬁcally, we
address the following questions in our analysis using high res-
olution hydrodynamic simulations in one and two dimensions.
• When a collimated blast wave traveling in a stellar wind
environment encounters a wind termination shock, how
does the size of the density jump affect the dynamics
and resulting light curve?
• What happens when there is a density drop instead of
a jump? Does the blast wave speed up, and in turn,
recollimate? Will this cause a rebrightening or ﬂare in
the light curve?
• When the blast wave encounters an extreme density in-
crease, does it immediately spread outward from this
high energy collision and cause ﬂares in the light curve?
Does this sideways spreading depend on the size of the
density jump?
To answer these questions, we use a numerical relativistic
hydrodynamics (RHD) code with adaptive mesh reﬁnement
called RAM (Zhang & MacFadyen 2006, 2009) for our numer-
ical simulations. We use the radiation calculation methodol-
ogy explained in van Eerten et al. (2010a,b) to calculate syn-
chrotron afterglow light curves and spectra. In Section 2 we
discuss the dynamics of the simulations which is followed by
Section 3 discussing the resulting light curves. We summarize
and conclude our ﬁndings in Section 4. Details of the resolu-
tion of our simulations are explained in Appendix A, and we
discuss the specialized case of a spike in circumburst medium
in Appendix B.
2. DYNAMICS OF BLAST WAVE ENCOUNTERS
A key aspect in understanding the role of the circumburst
medium in the ﬂux emitted from a blast wave is the dynamics
of the blast wave in that medium. In this section, we discuss
those dynamics.
2.1. Initial Conditions
The initial conditions for an adiabatic blast wave (“jet”)
formed by a GRB are described by the BM solution in spher-
ical coordinates. For this paper, we use a conic section trun-
cated at a certain opening angle for the initial setup, instead
of the full spherical solution for, at early times, spreading has
not yet occurred. Using the initial conditions for a jet ﬂow-
ing in the radial direction with an opening angle, θ0, and a jet
energy, Ejet, we obtain the isotropic equivalent energy, Eiso.
Ejet = Eiso(1−cosθ0) ≈Eisoθ2
0/2
(1)
The initial radius, time, and dynamics of the interaction of
the jet with the circumburst medium are calculated using the
BM self similar solution. For this paper, we represent the
circumburst medium interior to the density change using a
power-law density proﬁle which is described as:
ρext = ρre f
 r
Rre f
−k
(2)
where ρre f is the circumburst density at a reference radius,
Rre f , and k = 2 or 0 to represent the stellar wind or ISM envi-
ronment respectively. An ISM is a region of constant density,
and throughout this paper we use “ISM” and “homogeneous
medium” interchangeably. The isotropic energy of the system
is given by (BM):
Eiso = 8πρextγ2t3c5
17−4k
(3)
where γ is the ﬂuid Lorentz factor just behind the shock, and
Γ =
√
2γ is the Lorentz factor of the shock itself. Substituting
Equation 2 into Equation 3, and using the approximation that
at ultra-relativistic speeds, R0 ≈cT0, the initial radius of the
shock is:
R0 =
 
(17−4k)Eiso
8πρ0Rk
re f c2γ2
0
! 1
3−k
.
(4)
Using these expressions, we can solve for the initial time of
the simulation.
T0 = R0
c

1+
1
2(4−k)Γ2
0

(5)
As the jet propagates into the circumburst medium de-
scribed by Equation 2, the Lorentz factor and radius of the
shock over time are well known–the radius will follow a sim-
ilar solution to Equation 5. The subscript of “FS” is used to
denote the front of the shock, or the forward shock:
RFS = cT

1−
1
2(4−k)Γ2

.
(6)
The Lorentz factor evolves as
Γ = Γ0
 T
T0
−3−k
2
.
(7)
The initial conditions at T0 of our numerical simulations use
the full BM proﬁle, but for simplicity in our analytical so-
lution, we assume the blast wave is a homogeneous shell of
constant density within the shell, and the back of the shell
being at a radius of Rback:
Rback = RFS

1−
1
2(3−k)Γ2
FS

.
(8)
3
FIG. 1.— Diagram of the density proﬁle formed from a blast wave in a
stellar wind encountering a ISM. The ﬂuid in region 1 is the ISM into which
the blast wave is traveling. Region 2 contains all of the mass swept up after
the encounter with the density change. The ﬂuid in regions 3 and 4 is the
swept up mass prior to the encounter, meaning that after the encounter, the
amount of mass contained in regions 3 and 4 is constant. The ﬂuid in region
3 is that which has been shocked by the reverse shock, and the ﬂuid in region
4 is the unshocked material that is unaware of the encounter.
Equation 8 is derived to the leading order of 1/γ2 using the
approximation that the total swept up mass is contained within
the shell.
To simulate the encounter with a change in external
medium, we model the external density proﬁle as a piecewise
function:
ρext =

ρwind
γ > γenc
ρISM
γ ≤γenc
(9)
where γenc is the ﬂuid Lorentz factor at which the encounter
with the new environment occurs. The dynamics before the
encounter are described by the equations above, but the dy-
namics during the encounter and after the encounter are much
different. The simulation does not necessarily return to a BM
self similar solution for a relativistic blast wave in a homoge-
neous medium, for the BM solution is a slow attractor and a
perturbation in the simulation, such as a density change, can
cause large deviations from the BM solution (Gruzinov 2000).
Also, after the encounter, the blast wave may no longer be rel-
ativistic which prevents the blast wave from evolving toward
the BM solution in a homogeneous medium, and a solution
similar to ST is expected instead.
2.2. Analytical Solution
To analytically model the dynamics of a blast wave in a stel-
lar wind environment encountering a density change followed
by a homogeneous medium, we extend the derivations done
in PW and NG. With our extensions, the analytical solution is
applicable for a wide range of density jumps as well as density
drops.
For simplicity, we model the shocks of the blast wave as
simple homogeneous shells. During the encounter, the shock
breaks up in to three different regions–regions 2, 3, and 4 of
Figure 1. To get the full analytical solution of the simula-
tion, the pressures, densities, Lorentz factors, and radii of the
three regions (regions 2, 3, and 4, which are referenced by
subscripts from here forward in this paper) are needed.
Across the contact discontinuity, the pressure and ﬂuid
Lorentz factors are equal, meaning p2 = p3, and γ2 = γ3 = ΓCD.
Before the reverse shock passes the “back” of the shock, the
ﬂuid in region 4 has no knowledge of the encounter, meaning
the density, pressure, and Lorentz factor are calculated as if
no encounter has occurred. The rest of the ﬂuid has experi-
enced the encounter, and to calculate the values analytically, a
convenient factor to deﬁne is that of NG Equation 3, ψ, which
can be derived from conservation of mass.
ψ2 ≡
γ4(Tenc)
γ2(Tenc)
2
=
3a−4
p
12/a(a−1)−1
(10)
a =
ρISM
ρwind(R = Renc)
(11)
Using this factor, the Lorentz factor of the ﬂuid behind the
forward shock is described by a modiﬁed version of Equation
6 from NG:
γ2 = γenc
"
ψ2 +
17−4k
17

a
  T
Tenc
3
−1
!#−1/2
(12)
where Equation 12 differs from NG Equation 6 in that γ2 ∝
γenc as opposed to γ2 ∝γ4 of NG Equation 6.
To calculate the radius of the forward shock to the leading
order of 1/γ2
2, we integrate the velocity of the forward shock:
RFS(T) =Renc +c
Z T
Tenc
βFSdt
∼=Renc +cTenca17−4k
68γ2enc
 T
Tenc
−3
4 −T 4
4T 4enc

+cTenc
 T
Tenc
−1

1−ψ2
4γ2enc

.
(13)
The radius of the contact discontinuity is calculated in the
same fashion as Equation 13, except with βFS replaced by
βCD.
The pressure in regions 2 and 3 are identical, and are found
using the strong shock jump conditions.
p2 = p3 = 2
3ρISMΓ2
FSc2
(14)
One important aspect to note is that the reverse shock is not
necessarily strong or relativistic in the frame of the ﬂuid in
region 4: if the forward shock is relativistic, the reverse shock
is not (see PW for details). However, if the blast wave en-
counters a strong density jump causing the forward shock to
become non-relativistic, the reverse shock can form with rel-
ativistic speeds. Since we cannot assume a relativistic reverse
shock, we use the full shock jump conditions yielding the fol-
lowing equation for the density in region 3:
ρ3 = 4p3¯γ3ρ4
3p4 + p2
,
(15)
where ¯γ3 is the Lorentz factor of the ﬂuid in region 3 from the
frame of the unshocked ﬂuid in region 4:
¯γ3 = 1
2
γ4
γ3
+ γ3
γ4

.
(16)
Lastly, we need to calculate the velocity and radius of the re-
verse shock. We use conservation of mass to obtain the veloc-
ity of the reverse shock:
βRS = ρ3γ3β3 −ρ4γ4β4
ρ3γ3 −ρ4γ4
.
(17)
To calculate the radius of the reverse shock, we use conser-
vation of mass as well. The total mass in regions 3 and 4 is
4
constant after the encounter, meaning the integral over these
regions equals the swept up mass prior to the encounter.
Z RRS
Rback
r2ρ′
4 dr +
Z RCD
RRS
r2ρ′
3 dr =
Z Renc
0
r2ρwind(r)dr
(18)
Equation 18 is important because we know the densities in
regions 3 and 4, we have calculated Rback from Equation 8,
we know RCD from Equation 13 but with βFS replaced by βCD,
and we know the total mass swept up prior to the encounter
(the right hand side of Equation 18). This leaves us with an
equation for the radius of the reverse shock:
R3
RS(ρ′
4 −ρ′
3) =
3
3−kR3
encρwind(Renc)+R3
backρ′
4 −R3
CDρ′
3.
(19)
Equations 18 and 19 contain ρ′, which is the density of the
ﬂuid in the lab frame, ρ′ = γρ, whereas ρ, without a prime, is
the co-moving density.
Solving for RRS in Equation 19 is only applicable when the
reverse shock has not yet passed the back of the shock. Once
the reverse shock passes the back of the shock, Equation 18
no longer applies, and the new integral to solve is:
Z RCD
Rback
r2ρ′
3 dr =
Z Renc
0
r2ρwind(r)dr
R3
back = R3
CD −
3
3−kR3
enc
ρwind(Renc)
ρ′
3
(20)
where we now solve for Rback instead of RRS, and Rback is no
longer calculated from Equation 8 because region 4 has been
shocked by the reverse shock and has knowledge of the en-
counter. The blast wave continues on with these two regions
of Equation 20–one containing the newly swept up mass in
region 2, and one containing the mass swept up prior to the
encounter–resulting in the blast wave never completely re-
turning to the BM solution of a blast wave in an ISM.
In the following section, Section 2.3, we compare our ana-
lytical solution with the numerical results for various types of
encounters.
2.3. Numerical Results
Our numerical simulations demonstrate the resulting dy-
namics of an afterglow blast wave in a stellar wind environ-
ment encountering a sudden change in density and an ISM
environment. We use the relativistic adaptive mesh (RAM)
parallel RHD code (Zhang & MacFadyen 2006, 2009) with
a second-order weighted scheme. We simulate two differ-
ent size jumps (“walls”), of factors 4 and 100, and one drop,
of factor
1
100. We use these speciﬁc initial conditions to nu-
merically simulate a wide range of encounters thought to po-
tentially cause light curve ﬂares. However, as we explain in
Section 3, none of these scenarios result in ﬂares on the time
scale of 0.1 to 10 days. Before delving into the resulting light
curves, we ﬁrst explain the dynamics and numerical results.
We set up six simulations all of which have a starting time
and radius equivalent to the ﬂuid Lorentz factor behind the
front of the shock, γ = 15. This starting Lorentz factor was
chosen to ensure γ > 1
θ0 , where θ0 = 0.1 rad (typical for after-
glow jets, Frail et al. 2001) for our simulations and is the half
opening angle of the jet.
• Simulation no encounter:
ρext = ρ0

r
Rref
−2
• Simulation γ5a4:
ρext =





ρ0

r
Rref
−2
γ > 5
4ρ0

Rγ=5
Rref
−2
γ ≤5
• Simulation γ5a100:
ρext =





ρ0

r
Rref
−2
γ > 5
100ρ0

Rγ=5
Rref
−2
γ ≤5
• Simulation γ10a4:
ρext =





ρ0

r
Rref
−2
γ > 10
4ρ0

Rγ=10
Rref
−2
γ ≤10
• Simulation γ10a100:
ρext =





ρ0

r
Rref
−2
γ > 10
100ρ0

Rγ=10
Rref
−2
γ ≤10
• Simulation γ5a 1
100:
ρext =





ρ0

r
Rref
−2
γ > 5
0.01ρ0

Rγ=5
Rref
−2
γ ≤5
We ﬁrst ran all six simulations in one dimension, and then
ran three simulations in two dimensions, choosing to run those
which would be most informative to answering the questions
outlined in the Introduction.
Figure 2 shows the analytical solution of the density of sim-
ulation γ5a4, in one dimension plotted against the numerical
result of simulation γ5a4 in one dimension, showing the cor-
respondence of our analytical model with our numerical re-
sults of the shock formation at the encounter. Our analyti-
cal model assumes homogeneous shells with constant density
between the shocks which is why the analytical solution in
Figure 2 has a clearly marked “back” of the shock, whereas
the numerical simulation uses the full BM proﬁle and has no
exact “back” of the shock. The small discrepancy between
the analytical and numerical RFS shown in Figure 2 is roughly
∆RFS = 9.6 × 1015 cm. Our analytical solution is accurate
to the order of 1/γ2 = 0.0855 at the time shown in Figure 2
and ∆RFS
cT
= 3.893×10−4 ≪1/γ2, meaning that the analytical
model conforms to the numerical results to the required ac-
curacy. Also, it is apparent from Figure 2 that the densities
within each region are not constant, but actually have a posi-
tive slope. This is a known discrepancy between the assumed
homogeneous shells and the full BM solution, and leads to a
slight over-prediction of the ﬂux during the encounter by the
analytical solution (van Eerten et al. 2009).
Figures 3 and 4 show our analytical solutions plotted with
the simulation results of the Lorentz factors behind the for-
ward shocks as they evolve. The small deviations towards the
beginning of the simulations (at smaller radii) in these ﬁgures
are from lack of resolution. The resolution required to resolve
the blast wave at these early times is very high. However, for
the simulations with encounters at γ2 = 5, the discrepancy dis-
appears well before the encounter. For the simulations with
the encounter at γ2 = 10, the lack of resolution does affect
5
FIG. 2.— Figure of the shocks formed during the encounter for simulation
γ5a4 in 1D (wind termination shock at γenc = 5, and a density increase of
factor 4). The simulation is plotted in blue, the dashed black line shows the
analytical solution for this simulation, and the green dashed line represents
simulation no encounter in 1D (no circumburst environment change) at the
same time as simulation γ5a4 is depicted.
FIG. 3.— Lorentz factor of the ﬂuid behind the forward shock plotted over
radius for the analytical solution as well as the numerical simulation for sim-
ulation γ5a4 (wind termination shock at γenc = 5, and a density increase of
factor 4) and γ10a4 (wind termination shock at γenc = 10, and a density in-
crease of factor 4) in 1D.
the convergence of the numerical and analytical results, but
qualitatively, the results are the same. The resolutions of our
simulations are discussed further in Appendix A. The devia-
tions at large radii (at very late time) in Figures 3 and 4 are
from the Lorentz factor of the forward shock becoming non-
relativistic, and our analytical model having accuracy of order
1/γ2.
From the examples shown in Figures 2 through 4, it is ap-
parent that our analytical solution accurately predicts the dy-
namics of a one dimensional blast wave in a stellar wind en-
countering a change in density, be it a jump or drop, followed
by an ISM environment. Also, it is important to note that
when the post encounter forward shock remains relativistic,
the ﬂuid Lorentz factor at which the encounter occurs does
not qualitatively change the post-encounter dynamics in one
FIG. 4.— Lorentz factor of the ﬂuid behind the forward shock plotted over
radius for the analytical solution and the numerical simulation for simulation
γ5a 1
100 in 1D (density decrease of factor 100 at γenc = 5).
dimension, as seen in Figure 3. The post-encounter dynamics
are simply scaled to a reﬂect the larger encounter Lorentz fac-
tor. This is also clear from the analytical model, since neither
the change in Lorentz factor at the encounter nor the pre- and
post-encounter slopes depend on Lorentz factor.
The one dimensional simulations show that the dynamics
follow the analytical predictions that the Lorentz factor of the
forward shock drops immediately as it encounters a higher
density region, and the amount by which it drops is propor-
tional to the change in density at the encounter. This is shown
in Figure 5 for simulations γ5a4, γ5a 1
100, and γ10a100. Fig-
ure 5 depicts the Lorentz factor in the color coding, with the
complete radial ﬂuid proﬁle along the central axis of the blast
wave (plotted in the horizontal) over time (plotted in the ver-
tical). This ﬁgure shows the evolution of the forward shock
over time before and after the encounter as well as the for-
mation of the reverse shock at the encounter and its post-
encounter evolution. Figure 5 clearly illustrates the varying
behaviors of the forward and reverse shocks for the various
simulations. Simulations γ5a100 and γ10a4 show similar be-
havior. The left column in Figure 5 shows the Lorentz fac-
tor over time and radius for simulations γ5a4 and γ10a100 in
1D. If the blast wave encounters a drop in density, the Lorentz
factor of the blast wave will increase (i.e., the blast wave will
speed up), again, in proportion to the size of the drop, which
is seen in the top right panel in Figure 5.
The effects of the magnitude of density change on the dy-
namics of the reverse shock are shown in Figure 5. The top
left panel in Figure 5 depicts the Lorentz factor for the simu-
lation with a small density increase of factor 4. Shortly after
the encounter, the reverse shock slowly travels away from the
forward shock towards the origin, but this is not an immediate
process like that of a larger density jump shown in the bot-
tom left panel in Figure 5. For a large density jump, almost
immediately after the encounter, the reverse shock has a large
enough Lorentz factor, compared to the Lorentz factor of the
forward shock, to break away from the forward moving ﬂuid
and travel backwards towards the origin. This difference in
reverse shock Lorentz factors of simulation γ5a4 and simu-
lation γ10a100 is from the forward shock becoming immedi-
ately non-relativistic after the encounter with a large density
6
FIG. 5.— Plot shows in color coding the ﬂuid Lorentz factor, with radial distance on the horizontal axis and time on the vertical axis. For one dimensional
simulations, the Lorentz factor does not depend on angle, but for the two dimensional simulation, only the Lorentz factor along the axis through the center of the
blast wave is shown. Top left: simulation γ5a4 in 1D (blast wave in stellar wind that encounters a density jump of factor 4 at γenc = 5). Top right: simulation
γ5a 1
100 in 1D (blast wave traveling in a stellar wind environment that encounters a density drop of factor 100 at γenc = 5). Bottom: simulation γ10a100 in 1D
(left) and an on axis (with the blast wave) slice of the 2D simulation (right, blast wave traveling in a stellar wind environment encountering a density jump of a
factor of 100 at γenc = 10).
jump (of factor 100) versus the much smaller decrease in for-
ward shock Lorentz factor with a smaller density jump (of
factor 4). As explained in Section 2.2, the amount by which
the forward shock Lorentz factor drops is proportional to the
Lorentz factor with which the reverse shock forms. For sim-
ulation γ5a 1
100, which has a density decrease of factor 100,
the reverse shock takes much longer to overcome the forward
moving ﬂuid and start traveling backwards towards to origin.
This is seen in the top right panel in Figure 5. The Lorentz
factor of the forward shock increases, causing the Lorentz fac-
tor of the reverse shock shortly after the encounter to be very
small in comparison with the forward shock Lorentz factor.
A closer look at the bottom left panel in Figure 5 reveals the
reﬂecting-like behavior of the inner boundary as the reverse
shock travels towards the origin and is seemingly reﬂected
back. This behavior is independent of boundary conditions or
inner boundary position and results from the increase in pres-
sure caused by the reverse shock traveling toward the origin.
This increase in pressure creates conditions similar to a ﬁre-
ball, causing a new blast wave to be formed. This is not seen
with simulations γ5a4, γ10a4, or γ5a 1
100 which have smaller
density jump factors/a density drop, but is seen with simula-
tion γ5a100 (wind termination shock when γ2 = 5 with a den-
sity jump of 100) yielding the conclusion that even at slower
speeds, the strong, large density jump still slows the forward
shock enough to cause a strong reverse shock to form and in
turn, cause the conditions similar to a ﬁreball. From here for-
ward in this paper, we will refer to this newly formed blast
wave caused by the strong reverse shock as the “secondary
blast wave” for simplicity and clarity.
The formation of the secondary blast wave is also seen in
our two dimensional model of simulation γ10a100. How-
ever, the ﬂuid instabilities that follow the encounter with the
wind termination shock in two dimensions slow the secondary
blast wave causing it to never encounter the wind termination
shock, and in turn, the continuous reﬂecting back and forth
is never realized. This is shown in the bottom right panel in
Figure 5, which displays the ﬂuid Lorentz factor over time
and radius of a one dimensional slice of the two dimensional
simulation γ10a100 along the axis of the jet.
7
In order to study the effect of the density change on the post
encounter blast wave collimation, we ran simulations γ5a4,
γ10a100, and γ5a 1
100 in two dimensions. Figure 6 shows the
results of our two dimensional simulations. We ﬁnd that when
the blast wave encounters a sudden density increase that is
not very large (of factor 4, like that of simulations γ5a4 and
γ10a4), the fastest, most energetic ﬂuid will puncture the wall
and continue through to the new medium (top left panel in
Figure 6). This behavior results in the blast wave recollimat-
ing after the encounter as only the ﬂuid with the highest pres-
sure can pass through to the new region and open a pathway
for the rest of the blast wave to continue through to the new
environment. This is most clearly depicted in the top right
panel in Figure 6, which shows the percentage of energy en-
closed at various angles over time for simulation γ5a4 in two
dimensions. Before the encounter, the blast wave spreads out,
which is seen as the angles encompassing certain percentages
of energy increase over time at times less then Tenc in the top
right panel in Figure 6. At the time of the encounter, the most
energetic ﬂuid passes through to the new environment and rec-
ollimates, which compresses a large percentage of the blast
wave energy into a smaller angle. This accounts for the de-
crease in angle encompassing roughly half of the total energy
after the encounter in the top right panel in Figure 6. Also,
if there were no encounter, the angle encompassing roughly
80% of the total energy would continue to increase as it did
prior to the encounter in the top right panel in Figure 6, but in-
stead, the angle stays relatively constant. This is because the
ﬂuid of higher energy (depicted with colors of yellow through
red in the top left panel in Figure 6) no longer spreads side-
ways but tries to travel through the wall to the new medium.
The only part of the blast wave that continues to spread side-
ways is the lowest energy ﬂuid (shown in green and light blue
in the top left panel in Figure 6), which results in the continual
increase of the angle encompassing 100% of the total energy
of the blast wave for simulation γ5a4 in 2D (shown in the top
right panel in Figure 6) after the encounter.
The dynamics of a blast wave encountering a large density
increase (on the order of 100, like that of simulations γ5a100
and γ10a100) are different than that of a smaller density in-
crease. The most energetic ﬂuid punctures the wall and con-
tinues on to the next medium, similar to the most energetic
ﬂuid encountering a smaller density increase, but instead of
opening up a pathway for the rest of the blast wave to move
through, a strong reverse shock is formed. This strong reverse
shock shocks and spreads the ﬂuid that has not yet passed
through to the new medium, forming vortices that are trapped
within the stellar wind environment and never pass through
to the ISM. The middle left panel in Figure 6 and Figure 7
illustrate these dynamics showing the speciﬁc energy of sim-
ulation γ10a100 in two dimensions at two times after the en-
counter. The middle left panel in Figure 6 depicts the blast
wave a short time after the encounter showing that the most
energetic ﬂuid has passed through to the ISM, and the reverse
shock is traveling back through the ﬂuid in the stellar wind,
shocking and spreading the ﬂuid. At the much later time of
Figure 7, the highest energy ﬂuid that passed through to the
ISM has began to expand as it assimilates to the new medium.
Also, the reverse shock has now passed through the ﬂuid be-
hind the density jump, caused the formation of vortices, and
created the condition for the secondary blast wave to form.
The remains of secondary blast wave can be seen in Figure 7
by the vortices near the horizontal axis at radii around 2×1018
cm.
The middle right panel in Figure 6 shows the percentages
of energy encompassed in various angles, depicting that the
highest concentration of energy is contained within the angle
holding the ﬂuid that passes through the density jump, and a
very minimal amount of energy is contained within the vor-
tices that have been formed in the stellar wind region. The
chaotic behavior of the region in purple and pink in the mid-
dle right panel in Figure 6 is from those vortices as well.
Lastly, the dynamics of the simulation with the sudden den-
sity drop do not show a recollimation with the increase in
Lorentz factor. The ﬂuid speeds up and as it does, it spreads
at a rate slightly faster than in the stellar wind environment.
This is shown in the bottom row of Figure 6.
With the understanding of the dynamics of the blast wave
encountering a sudden change in density, the next section dis-
cusses the resulting light curves.
3. LIGHT CURVES
We calculate the GRB afterglow light curves using the
radiation calculation methodology from van Eerten et al.
(2010a,b) at an X-ray frequency of 5×1017 Hz (except where
otherwise speciﬁed), similar to the frequency detected by
Swift. The time at which the ﬂux from the local emission of
the afterglow is observed is denoted as the “observer time,” or
tobs, and is calculated by:
tobs = te −rcosθ
c
(21)
where te is the emission time (i.e., the lab frame time of the
emitting ﬂuid element), r is the radius of the local ﬂuid ele-
ment at te, and θ is the angle between the direction to the ﬂuid
element and the direction to the observer. For an emission
time, te, the ﬂuid at the front of the shock will be observed
ﬁrst, and can be represented as:
Tobs ∼= te −R
c
(22)
where Tobs denotes the earliest time any ﬂux from the blast
wave at the time, te, is observed. On our ﬁgures, we label the
ﬁrst time the encounter can be observed as Tobs,enc.
For our light curves, we use values of ϵB = 0.01, ϵe = 0.1,
and p = 2.5, where ϵB and ϵe are the fractions of internal en-
ergy that contribute to the magnetic ﬁeld at the shock front
and to accelerating electrons respectively, and p expresses the
energy distribution index of the shock-accelerated particles
(and is not to be confused with pressure). We also do not
consider electron cooling in our light curves shown here, but
have found that this does not qualitatively change our results.
We expect the pre-jet break light curves to follow the tempo-
ral behavior of t(1−3p)/4 in the stellar wind environment, and
t3(1−p)/4 in the ISM (e.g., Granot & Sari 2002).
It has been claimed that blast waves encountering wind ter-
mination shocks generate ﬂares or rebrightenings which can
be seen at early times and are caused from either the reverse
shock forming at the encounter (PW) or the blast wave transi-
tioning to the new medium (Eldridge et al. 2006; Mesler et al.
2012). As discussed below, from our analytical and numeri-
cal analysis,we ﬁnd that a GRB jet encountering a change in
circumburst medium does not cause a ﬂare of the kind seen
by Swift. Neither the reverse shock at the encounter, nor the
blast wave’s transition to the new medium at the encounter
will cause an observable ﬂare.
8
FIG. 6.— Figures of the two dimensional dynamics. Left column: plots of the logarithm of speciﬁc energy at a time after the encounter. The blast wave is
aligned with the horizontal axis. Right column: ﬁgures showing the angle enclosing various percentages of the blast wave energy over time. The horizontal line
denotes the time of the encounter. Top row: simulation γ5a4 in 2D (blast wave traveling in a stellar wind environment encountering a wind termination shock
at γenc = 5 and a density increase of factor 4). Middle row: simulation γ10a100 in 2D (blast wave traveling in a stellar wind environment encountering a wind
termination shock at γenc = 10 and a density increase of factor 100). Bottom row: simulation γ5a 1
100 in 2D (blast wave traveling in a stellar wind environment
encountering a wind termination shock at γenc = 5 and a density decrease of factor 100).
9
FIG. 7.— Figure of the speciﬁc energy of the 2D simulation γ10a100 (blast
wave traveling in a stellar wind environment encountering a wind termination
shock at γenc = 10 and a density increase of factor 100) shown at a later time
than the middle left panel in Figure 6. The blast wave in this ﬁgure is aligned
with the horizontal axis.
3.1. No Flares during the Observed Time Scale
Figure 8 depicts that there are no observable ﬂares in the
ﬂux emitted from a blast wave encountering a small jump,
large jump, or large drop. This ﬁgure shows the light curves
calculated from the one dimensional simulation and analytical
model as well as the light curves calculated from the two di-
mensional numerical simulations for on and off-axis observer
angles. For all cases studied in this paper, there were no ob-
servable ﬂares.
The simulations demonstrate that a blast wave encountering
a wind termination shock of a small increase in density (of
factor 4) does not result in any disruption in the ﬂux observed
at early times. In fact, for a jump of factor 4 (simulations γ5a4
and γ10a4), the light curve gradually transitions to the slope
expected in the new environment, conﬁrming the results from
the spherical cases of NG and van Eerten et al. (2009). This is
seen with the on-axis light curves of the one and two dimen-
sional simulations (top left panel in Figure 8) and with the
light curves for a wide range of observer angles of the two di-
mensional simulation γ5a4 (top right panel in Figure 8). The
encounter is ﬁrst observable at roughly 46 days for the simu-
lations with γenc = 5, and for our simulations of γenc = 10, the
ﬁrst time the encounter is observed, Tobs,enc ≈3 days. These
times are much later than any ﬂares observed from Swift and
follow from our choice for γenc, which was selected for nu-
merical reasons. However, the time at which the encounter is
observed is inversely proportional to Γ4
enc:
Tobs,enc = T0Γ2
0
4Γ4enc
.
(23)
This scaling is calculated using Equations 6 and 7, and noting
that at (and before) the encounter k = 2. It follows that mod-
eling encounters at larger Lorentz factors, of say γenc = 25,
which corresponds to Tobs,enc ≈0.07 days, would result in the
observed encounter being in the range of times ﬂares are ob-
served (see e.g., Zhang et al. 2006). Nevertheless, from the
top right panel in Figure 9, it is apparent that the light curves
for blast waves encountering changes in external density pro-
ﬁles at varying Lorentz factors scale for one dimensional dy-
namics. Thus the light curve behavior at the time of the en-
counter for our numerical simulations of γenc = 5 and 10 are
indicative of the behavior of encounters at larger Lorentz fac-
tors. To ensure that this is accurate, we analytically model en-
counters at γenc = 25, and discuss the light curves from those
dynamics throughout this section. The light curves calculated
from our analytical model use the same linear radiative trans-
fer algorithm as the light curves calculated from the numerical
simulations.
For simulation γ5a 1
100, the ﬂux observed follows the same
qualitative results as simulation γ5a4 at early times–the ob-
served ﬂux transitions smoothly to the slope of the ﬂux ob-
served solely in the ISM environment after the encounter.
Even though the blast wave’s velocity increases after the en-
counter (Figures 4 and top right in 5), a ﬂare during the en-
counter is not observed. Instead, the ﬂux drops more steeply
as it evolves towards its lower post-encounter base level. This
is shown in the two ﬁgures in the bottom row in Figure 8
where the ﬁgure on the bottom left depicts the ﬂux observed
on axis with the blast wave using the one and two dimensional
simulations along with the analytical solution, and the latter
displays the ﬂux observed at various observer angles for the
two dimensional simulation.
It is apparent from the light curves of simulations γ5a4 and
γ5a 1
100, that as the magnitude of the ﬂux of a blast wave in the
ISM environment lowers, there is no rebrightening. Next, we
discuss the light curves of simulation γ10a100, which are of a
blast wave encountering an ISM environment of much higher
density.
With the magnitude of the ﬂux of a blast wave traveling
solely in the ISM environment being much higher than the
magnitude of the ﬂux from a blast wave in the wind (because
the magnitude is a function of the density in that region), one
might ﬁrst assume a ﬂare must be observed as the ﬂux from
the blast wave at the encounter evolves to the new slope and
magnitude. However, this is not correct–there is still no re-
brightening at the time of the encounter. This is shown in the
middle row of Figure 8. The right middle panel in Figure 8
shows the light curves for the 2D simulation γ10a100 plotted
against the light curves for the 2D simulation no encounter
for various observer angles. This ﬁgure illustrates the devia-
tion of the light curve from the blast wave encountering the
density jump from the light curve of no encounter at all. The
magnitude of the ﬂux decreases as the blast wave travels into
the new medium resulting in no ﬂaring activity. The off axis
light curve calculated at θobs = 0.2 radians in the right panel
in the middle row of Figure 8 shows a bump at around 100
days. Although the ﬂux does not increase at this point, it does
deviate from the expected slope. This bump in the light curve
is observable at a wide range of frequencies, from the optical
to the X-ray, and exhibits similar behavior at all frequencies
at which it is observed. The bump could be considered a re-
brightening, however, it is only seen at observer angles larger
than the jet opening angle, and it is unlikely that the prompt
emission will be observed at this angle due to the extreme
beaming needed of the gamma radiation.
Figure 9 depicts the transition of the light curve as the blast
wave changes environments as well as the overall scaling of
the light curves. The top left panel in Figure 9 shows analyt-
ical light curves for a blast wave traveling in a stellar wind
environment with γenc = 25 for two scenarios: a density jump
of factor 100 (the solid blue line) and a density drop of factor
10000 (the dashed blue line). These light curves are plotted
against the light curve for a blast wave traveling solely in the
10
FIG. 8.— Figures showing light curves calculated from simulations all with the jet half-opening angle of θ0 = 0.1. Left column: light curves for the simulations
in one and two dimensions as well as the light curves calculated from the analytical model in one dimension. The conic and spherical one dimensional dynamics
represent the assumption of assuming either spherical or conic outﬂow, respectively, when calculating the light curve. Right column: light curves calculated from
the two dimensional simulations for various observer angles. Top row: light curves for simulation γ5a4 (blast wave encountering a density jump of factor 4 at an
observer time of roughly 46 days). Middle row: light curves for simulation γ10a100 (blast wave encountering a density jump of factor 100 at an observer time of
roughly 3 days). Right plot also shows the light curves for simulation no encounter at various observer angles. Bottom row: light curves for simulation γ5a 1
100
(blast wave encountering a density drop of factor 100 at an observer time of roughly 46 days)
11
stellar wind environment (green line), a blast wave traveling
solely in the homogeneous medium corresponding to the den-
sity jump of factor 100 (red solid line), and a blast wave trav-
eling solely in the homogeneous medium corresponding to the
density drop of factor 10000 (dashed red line). As seen in this
ﬁgure, the observed ﬂux after the encounter slowly transitions
to the slope of the ﬂux observed from the ISM environment,
resulting in no sudden increase in ﬂux. The ﬂux does not im-
mediately jump up to the new magnitude because the blast
wave has been slowed by the encounter and is not energetic
enough to cause a rebrightening. For the case of a drop–the
ﬂux observed from a blast wave in the new ISM environment
is at a lower magnitude than the ﬂux observed from a blast
wave in the wind environment. This results in the ﬂux ob-
served from the blast wave encountering the new environment
to decrease, instead of increase, after the encounter to evolve
in the new environment.
In addition, this ﬁgure shows an interesting feature, that can
also be seen in Figure 8, of a shallowing of the light curve.
The light curve transitions from the slope of a blast wave in a
stellar wind to the less steep slope of a blast wave in an ISM.
This late-time shallowing of the light curve is not the turnover
of a steep decay into a plateau of the canonical light curve, but
a different transition at later times. This is an observed feature
of GRB afterglows (e.g., Evans et al. 2009; Li et al. 2012;
Zaninoni et al. 2013) and a change in circumburst medium is
one of the few ways for the light curve of the blast wave to
transition to a new slope.
From the light curves of simulations γ5a4, γ10a100, and
γ5a 1
100, as well as the light curves from the simulations not
shown here (γ5a100 and γ10a4), we conclude that there is
no rebrightening at times on the order of minutes to days for
a blast wave encountering a change in circumburst medium.
The simulations show that when the magnitude of the ﬂux
observed in the ISM is lower than the ﬂux observed in the
stellar wind environment at the time of the encounter (top left
panel in Figure 9) the blast wave conforms to the new slope
and there is no rebrightening. When the magnitude of the ﬂux
observed from a blast wave in an ISM environment is higher
than the magnitude of the ﬂux observed from a blast wave
in the stellar wind environment, the blast wave still smoothly
transitions to the new environment. In all cases, though, the
ﬂux observed from the blast wave after the encounter is lower
than the ﬂux observed from a blast wave that has only traveled
in the ISM.
To test whether the light curves for our simulations are an
accurate depiction of a blast wave encountering a circumburst
density change, or if they only represent the light curves for
encounters at ﬂuid Lorentz factors of γ ≤10, with changes
in density of factors ≤100 and with θ0 = 0.1, we analytically
solve for the light curves of various blast wave encounters for
various encounter Lorentz factors, γenc, density change fac-
tors, and jet half opening angles, θ0. The top right panel in
Figure 9 shows light curves for one dimensional analytical
models of blast waves traveling in a stellar wind environment
that encounter a density change of factor 10 followed by a ho-
mogeneous medium with the encounters happening at vary-
ing Lorentz factors. When the factor by which the density
changes is kept ﬁxed, the shape of the light curve remains in-
dependent of the actual time of the encounter and light curves
for different encounter times can simply be shifted to match,
as can be seen from the ﬁgure.
The bottom left panel in Figure 9 shows the light curves for
blast waves traveling in the stellar wind environment that en-
counter a density change of varying magnitudes at γenc = 25.
We show here density changes ranging from 10−8 to roughly
correspond with the density drops used in Mesler et al. (2012),
to 103. For larger density jumps, the blast wave quickly be-
comes non-relativistic, causing our analytical model to be-
come less accurate. Lastly, the bottom right panel in Fig-
ure 9 shows light curves for blast waves traveling in a stel-
lar wind environment that encounter a density jump of factor
10 at γenc = 25 for various jet half opening angles, θ0. The
only light curve in this ﬁgure that has some resemblance of a
ﬂare is that of the blue line, which has an opening angle very
close to γenc ∼1/θ0, meaning that for any ﬂare to possibly oc-
cur around the time of the encounter, γenc = 1/θ0. This is the
setup of our simulations γ10a4 and γ10a100: γenc = 10, and
θ0 = 0.1, and no ﬂare is observed in one or two dimensions.
From this analysis, we conclude that for a blast wave trav-
eling in a stellar wind environment that encounters a sudden
change in circumburst environment, there is no observable re-
brightening regardless of the size of the jump, drop, or ﬂuid
Lorentz factor at the time of the encounter that we have stud-
ied. There is a bump in the light curve at the observation angle
of θobs = 0.2 radians for the light curve of simulation γ10a100
in 2D, but θobs > θ0 and thus this is not a likely indication of
an observable ﬂare. We do not see a ﬂare from the forward
shock, nor do we see a ﬂare caused by the reverse shock at
times corresponding to the afterglow ﬂares seen by Swift.
We study a single spherically symmetric change in the cir-
cumburst environment. However, the actual environment may
have a more complicated structure with instabilities (e.g., van
Marle & Keppens 2012) or thin circumburst shells (Mesler
et al. 2012). A study of asymmetric structures (i.e., density
clumps) around the progenitor would require three dimen-
sional simulations and is beyond the scope of this paper. We
do look at the interaction with circumburst shells, and our re-
sults are discussed further in Appendix B. In this case too, we
have been unable to reproduce the ﬂares reported by Mesler
et al. (2012).
3.2. Very Late Time Rebrightening
The simulations of a density jump did show ﬂares at times
long after the encounter occurred (at times much later than
plotted in Figure 8). At such late times (on the order of 104
days), these ﬂares are beyond X-ray observations, but may be
of interest at radio frequencies. There are two contributors to
these ﬂares–the ﬁreball conditions created from the strong re-
verse shock that causes a secondary blast wave to form, shown
in the bottom row of Figure 5, and the encounter of the re-
ceding jet with the wind termination shock. We discuss the
contribution of the secondary blast wave ﬁrst, followed by a
discussion of the receding jet.
Figure 10 shows the very late time ﬂare observed from the
one and two dimensional simulations of simulation γ10a100.
Comparing the time at which the ﬂare begins for simulation
γ10a100 in 1D and 2D, shown in Figure 10, with the time
and radius of the secondary blast wave shown in the bottom
left panel in Figure 5, it is apparent that the secondary blast
wave is a cause of the rebrightening. This is conﬁrmed by
the left panel in Figure 10, which shows the light curve calcu-
lated for simulation γ10a100 in 1D using the entire blast wave
(blue line), against the light curve observed from the parts of
the blast wave at radii larger than the encounter radius (green
line). The left panel in Figure 10 clearly illustrates that the
12
FIG. 9.— Figures showing the transitions of light curves as the blast wave travels through an encounter with a density change. All ﬁgures are of light curves
calculated from the one dimensional analytical model, and all except for the bottom right assume spherical outﬂow. Top left: blue light curves are of blast wave
traveling in a stellar wind environment encountering a density jump of factor 100 (solid blue line) and a density drop of factor 10000 (dashed blue line) followed
by a homogeneous medium. These are plotted against the light curve for a blast wave traveling solely in a stellar wind environment (green line) and the light
curves for blast waves traveling solely in the homogeneous medium of the jump (red solid line) and of the drop (dashed solid line). Top right: light curves for
blast waves traveling in a stellar wind encountering a density jump of factor 10 followed by a homogeneous medium with the encounters at various times. Bottom
left: light curves for blast waves traveling in a stellar wind environment encountering a density change of various magnitudes at a time corresponding to γenc = 25.
Bottom right: light curves for blast waves traveling in a stellar wind environment encountering a density jump of factor 10 when γenc = 25 for various opening
angles.
ﬂare is caused by the ﬂuid inside the encounter radius at late
times, and the most energetic ﬂuid in the 1D simulation that is
at radius smaller than Renc at late times is the secondary blast
wave.
The left panel in Figure 10, although explaining the ﬂare
for the one dimensional case of simulation γ10a100, does not
explain the small ﬂares seen in the one dimensional conical
outﬂow for simulation γ5a4 nor the ﬂares for the two dimen-
sional simulations γ5a4 and γ10a100.
To fully understand the cause of this late time ﬂare, we must
emphasize that it is seen at a wide range of observer angles
and frequencies (right panel in Figure 10) at the same observer
time, and is observable at the same time as the ﬂare from the
secondary blast wave. The secondary blast wave cannot be the
cause of the ﬂare for the 2D simulation because it is quickly
slowed by the surrounding material (seen in the bottom right
panel in Figure 5), and is also not a characteristic of simula-
tion γ5a4 in one or two dimensions. Moreover, the ﬂare ob-
served in simulation γ5a4 is observable in the 2D light curves
and the 1D light curve that assumed conical outﬂow, but not
in the 1D light curve assuming spherical outﬂow.
The cause of the late time ﬂare is the receding jet that en-
counters the sudden density jump (but not from a density
drop). The reason this event seemingly occur at the same
time as the secondary blast wave is because the sum of the
distance traveled by the reverse shock and the ﬂux from the
secondary blast wave is the same as the distance traveled by
the ﬂux observed from the receding jet encountering the den-
sity jump. In short, the density jump results in a sudden in-
crease in ﬂux traveling in the opposite direction of the blast
wave itself, meaning a spike in the light curve will not be
observed at the time of the encounter because the light from
the encounter is traveling away from the observer. This is
conﬁrmed by the green lines in the right panel of Figure 10,
which shows that the light curve observed only from the for-
ward jet does not result in a very late time ﬂare whereas the
light curve observed from both the forward and the receding
jet does have a ﬂare. We obtain the same results when an-
13
FIG. 10.— Figures showing the late time ﬂare of simulation γ10a100 (γenc = 10, observed at roughly 3 days, with a jump of 100 and the jet half-opening angle
of θ0 = 0.1). Left: light curve of the one dimensional simulation γ10a100 including the entire evolution (blue line) and including only the ﬂuid at radii larger
than Renc (green line). Right: light curves for the 2D simulation γ10a100 at three frequencies: radio, ν = 4.86×109 Hz, visible, ν = 4.56×1014 Hz, and X-ray,
ν = 5 × 1017 Hz. These light curves were calculated on axis with the blast wave, θobs = 0.0 radians. The blue dashed line shows the light curve calculated at a
radio frequency using only the forward jet (and not including the receding jet).
alyzing simulation γ10a100 at different frequencies, and by
analyzing the very late time ﬂare of simulation γ5a4 in 2D
(and 1D conical outﬂow). The reason for the differing behav-
ior of the green line with the red and blue lines of the right
panel of Figure 10 is that the radio frequency corresponds to
a different spectral regime than the visible and X-ray frequen-
cies at early times. The radio frequency at early times is be-
low the synchrotron peak critical frequency, νm, meaning the
light curve scales with t0 in the wind scenario (e.g., Granot
& Sari 2002). This early time radio light curve behavior is
showing a different spectral regime with νm passing through
the observed band at the turnover.
The receding jet, or counter jet, has been known to be ob-
servable at very late times (Granot & Loeb 2003; Li & Song
2004; Zhang & MacFadyen 2009; Wang et al. 2009), with
its magnitude being a function of the density structure into
which the forward and receding jets are traveling (Wang et al.
2009). What differentiates the ﬂares from the receding jet
shown in this paper and the visibility of the receding jet in
previous work is that this ﬂare is from the encounter of the
receding jet with the sudden higher density region, as op-
posed to the counter jet being observable as it becomes non-
relativistic and isotropic (Li & Song 2004) or as it travels into
a differing circumburst medium than for the forward jet, or as
both the forward and receding jet travel into a highly dense
medium (Wang et al. 2009). In addition, the ﬂare in this paper
is observable at a wide range of observer angles, in contrast
to the prediction that the receding jet is only observed at op-
timal angles (Granot & Loeb 2003). The very late time ﬂare
observed in this work is from the sudden decrease in Lorentz
factor of the jets at the encounter, causing a ﬂare to be ob-
served as opposed to observing the receding jet itself.
From our simulations, the only ﬂare calculated is that at
much later times and much lower magnitudes in ﬂux than
those observed by Swift. The only possible ﬂare on the time
scale of observed ﬂares we are able to observe with a sudden
change in circumburst medium is the small bump in the light
curve seen at around 30 days at θobs = 0.2 radians in the mid-
dle right panel in Figure 8, but this occurs only for θobs > θ0
and thus is unlikely to be observed.
4. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
We have shown numerically and analytically that a blast
wave evolving partially in a stellar wind environment that en-
counters a sudden change in density, either an increase or a
decrease, followed by a constant density environment for a
wide range of initial conditions does not cause an observable
rebrightening. Flares at very late times are a function of the
size of the density jump–the larger the density jump at the en-
counter, the stronger the reverse shock, resulting in a brighter
late time ﬂare. We studied light curves for a wide range of
frequencies, and although this paper focuses on X-ray light
curves, we saw similar behaviors for a wide range of frequen-
cies. These ﬂares potentially might be observable at radio
frequencies under favorable conditions (Figure 10). This an-
swers the ﬁrst question listed in Section 1: the size of the den-
sity jump does affect the dynamics and resulting light curve
and may cause a faint very late time ﬂare at radio frequencies
for large jumps, but there are no observable ﬂares at X-ray
frequencies.
We found that for a blast wave traveling in a stellar wind
environment encountering an ISM environment, the resulting
ﬂux observed will gradually transition from one environment
to the next. As seen in Figure 9, if the ﬂux observed from a
blast wave traveling solely in the ISM is lower than the ﬂux
observed with a blast wave traveling solely in the wind envi-
ronment at the time of the encounter, the ﬂux observed from
the blast wave will simply dim and follow the same light curve
slope of the ISM. If the ﬂux observed from a blast wave trav-
eling solely in the ISM is higher than the ﬂux observed from a
blast wave traveling solely in a wind environment at the time
of the encounter, the observed ﬂux from the blast wave will
not suddenly increase, but stay relatively steady as it transi-
tions to the new slope of the ISM. This analysis was mostly
done for the one dimensional simulations and showed that the
light curve is affected by the size of the density change, but
not the Lorentz factor at the encounter. We have explored var-
ious ratios of γenc/γjet with two dimensional simulations and
found that this conclusion holds in two dimensions. How-
ever, strictly speaking the recollimation seen in the two di-
mensional simulations of density jumps is dependent on the
14
Lorentz factor of the ﬂuid at the encounter, and the amount
by which the blast wave recollimates should be inversely pro-
portional to the ﬂuid encounter Lorentz factor (i.e., blast wave
recollimates more for lower ﬂuid encounter Lorentz factors),
although this is not expected to have an effect on the occur-
rence of a ﬂare.
We have studied the two dimensional and one dimensional
effects of a density drop and have shown that the blast wave
does increase in speed, but does not recollimate. There is also
no rebrightening caused by this sudden increase in blast wave
speed (Figure 8). Our two dimensional studies of a density
jump have yielded the conclusion that there is some sideways
spreading from a high energy collision of the blast wave with
a large jump in circumburst density, and the amount by which
the blast wave spreads is highly dependent on the size of the
density jump. There is also a ﬂare at very late times, but this
is not caused by the sideways spreading. The late time ﬂare is
caused from the reverse shock of the receding jet (Figure 10).
This very late time ﬂare only occurs years after the initial ﬂux
observed from the blast wave, and data from Swift is only
gathered for days after the ﬁrst ﬂux is observed resulting in
the conclusion that this is not the ﬂare observed by Swift. In
addition, these ﬂares range from being 10−4 to 10−10 orders of
magnitude smaller than the initial ﬂux of the blast wave which
is below the threshold of Swift.
We have analytically modeled the light curves of one di-
mensional simulations, and are able to use the model for on
axis two dimensional dynamics that do not cause strong re-
verse shocks as well. From our analytical solutions and our
numerical models, we have answered the questions listed in
the Introduction and have concluded that a blast wave travel-
ing in a stellar wind environment that encounters a change in
density followed by an ISM environment will not cause ob-
servable ﬂares.
Our work conﬁrms earlier studies (NG, van Eerten et al.
2009) that a wind termination shock will not cause ﬂares in
light curves and extends this analysis to density drops and
to two dimensional simulations. We were unable to repro-
duce the ﬂares seen in PW due to the discrepancy of the ﬂuid
Lorentz factor during the encounter–the analysis done in PW
assumed a constant ﬂuid Lorentz factor during the encounter,
and we have extended this analysis to more accurately model
the decrease in ﬂuid Lorentz factor at the encounter. We were
not able to reproduce the ﬂares seen in Mesler et al. (2012)
and Eldridge et al. (2006). Both of these studies use an ana-
lytical model for the blast wave based on total swept up mass.
They do not account for the radial or angular structures of
the blast wave, such as the differing shock regions shown in
Figure 1 and the spreading of the shock as it becomes non-
relativistic. Without accounting for these radial and angular
structures, their models of the change in Lorentz factor with
change in mass result in a discrepancy in time scale and ﬂux
observed between ours and their results. In addition, as the
blast wave becomes non relativistic, the blast wave spreads
outwards and its width becomes comparable to the radius of
the blast wave. Thus, for the the interaction of a blast wave
with a spike, like that in Mesler et al. (2012), the swept up
mass model does not allow for capturing features on the same
or shorter time scale of the blast wave crossing the shell be-
cause the width of the shell is smaller than the width of the
blast wave. This is discussed more thoroughly in Appendix B.
The very late time radio ﬂares from our simulations are
similar to those seen in simulations of multiple shell mod-
els (Maxham & Zhang 2009; Vlasis et al. 2011). However,
the simulations of the multiple shell model are simulated by
adding energy to the system at late times leading to a different
light curve slope after the encounter. The very late time radio
ﬂares seen in this paper were calculated from a simulation in
which no energy was added, resulting in the ﬂares seen in this
paper being of different origin than from the multiple shell
models.
We conclude that a wind termination shock, or more gen-
erally, any sudden transition in circumburst density (even ex-
treme changes), is very unlikely to be the cause of the ﬂares
observed by Swift because those ﬂares return to the same base-
line as the light curve prior to the ﬂare (Burrows et al. 2005).
With the encounter of a change in circumburst environment,
the only observable ﬂares do not return to the same base-
line because ﬂux from the receding jet is also being observed.
Moreover, if the ﬂare occurred at the time of the encounter, the
light curve would transition to the new slope of the ISM mate-
rial, not the slope of the stellar wind. This makes it highly un-
likely that a ﬂare seen at the encounter with the change in cir-
cumburst environment could be the explanation for the ﬂares
seen by Swift.
Through our numerical and analytical analysis of a blast
wave encountering a circumburst density change that origi-
nated from the same point, we have concluded that a ﬂare will
not be observed by Swift, but a change in environment could
be the explanation for the late-time shallowing observed for
some GRB afterglows (Evans et al. 2009; Li et al. 2012; Zani-
noni et al. 2013). It would be of interest to compare our results
with observational data in future research.
This research was supported in part by NASA through
grant NNX10AF62G issued through the Astrophysics Theory
Program and by the NSF through grant AST-1009863 and
by the Chandra grant TM3-14005X. Resources supporting
this work were provided by the NASA High-End Computing
(HEC) Program through the NASA Advanced Supercom-
puting (NAS) Division at Ames Research Center.
The
software used in this work was in part developed by the
DOE-supported ASCI/Alliance Center for Astrophysical
Thermonuclear Flashes at the University of Chicago.
We
wish to thank Ehud Nakar for helpful discussions.
APPENDIX
GRID SETUP AND RESOLUTION
To run our simulations, we ﬁrst found the radius and time corresponding to the Lorentz factor at which we wanted the external
density change to occur, the size of the grid, as well as the needed resolution of the simulation. We use Equations 4 and 5 to set
up the initial shock location and time respectively with the initial ﬂuid Lorentz factor of 15. Next, we use Equation 6 to ﬁnd the
location of the Lorentz factor at which the jump occurs, and a form of Equation 7 to calculate the time at which the Lorentz factor
is equal to that at the jump.
The grid size needs to be large enough to ensure the simulation would run a satisfactory amount of time after the encounter.
15
We choose a maximum observation time, tobs, for the simulation to run, which gives an equation for the maximum radius and
simulation time:
tobs = t −R
c .
(A1)
R in Equation A1 is the maximum size of the grid, which we will refer to as rmax, and can be represented as the sum of the
radius of the encounter, Renc, plus some distance covered, ∆r.
R = rmax = Renc +∆r
(A2)
The variable ∆r in Equation A2 can be found by integrating the velocity over time. We use a much simpliﬁed model for the grid
setup because we need only a rough approximation. Using this simpliﬁed model, we assume that immediately after the encounter,
the blast wave returns to a BM self similar solution of a blast wave in a homogeneous environment. This, again, is not an accurate
assumption, but accurate enough for this purpose.
Velocity is represented by v = cβ and β =
q
1−1
Γ2 where the subscript of 2 here denotes that this is the Lorentz factor after the
encounter. Γ2 if found by a similar equation to Equation 7 except with k = 0.
Γ2 = Γenc
 t2
tenc
 −3
2
(A3)
Using the above equations, we obtain the integral of velocity over time.
∆r =
Z t f
tenc
"
1−
1
Γ2enc
 t2
tenc
3# 1
2
dt.
(A4)
To solve Equation A4, we can expand the integrand.
"
1−
1
Γ2enc
 t2
tenc
3# 1
2
= 1−
1
2Γ2enc
 t2
tenc
3
−
1
8Γ4enc
 t2
tenc
6
(A5)
Using Equation A5 in Equation A4 to ﬁnd ∆r, we derive rmax from Equation A2. Next, we calculate the corresponding
simulation time at the end of the grid using Equation A1.
We set the minimum value of the grid to a size that ensures the entire initial shock is shown, rmin = 0.01R0.
Lastly, to ﬁnd the optimal resolution, we need to be certain that the initial shock is resolved. We use adaptive mesh reﬁnement
and we specify the number of base blocks, bbr, the number of cells per block, cpb, and the maximum reﬁnement level, ref, for
the simulation. Equation A6 describes the relationship these values have to the resolution where A is the amount ∆R is reﬁned:
rmax −rmin
bbx ×cpb×2ref−1 = ∆R
A ,
(A6)
∆R =
R0
12Γ2
0 , cpb = 8, and the optimal value of A can be tested, as shown in Figure 11. Figure 11 shows that even with a very small
amount of resolution in the radial direction, the simulation still converges at the time of the encounter–the part of the simulation
on which we are focusing. The reﬁnement level in the θ direction must also be computed. The simulation only computes from
0 ≤θ ≤π
2 , which yields:
π/2
bbθ ×cpb×2ref−1 = θ0
B
(A7)
where bbθ is the number of base blocks in the θ direction, θ0 is the jet half opening angle, and B is the number by which we want
the width of the jet opening to be reﬁned.
Using the equations in this section, we are able to set up the simulation grid for optimal results.
CIRCUMSTELLAR SHELLS
It has been proposed that circumstellar shells could cause ﬂares in light curves (Mesler et al. 2012). We test this speciﬁc
scenario of the interaction of a blast wave with a narrow shell in which the blast wave becomes non-relativistic. We model this
scenario as a stellar wind environment followed a large density jump of small width that is terminated by a large density drop
followed by a homogeneous medium. We model the setup of Mesler et al. (2012) but exclude the wind termination shock for we
have analyzed the effect of a wind termination shock in this paper and have concluded that will not cause a ﬂare. Although we
do not model the wind reverse shock in this scenario, the reverse shock acts on the mass ejected by the stellar wind. The Lorentz
factor at the encounter with the strong density jump, according to the swept up mass approximation, is therefore identical with or
without accounting for the wind reverse shock. Our stellar wind environment setup is:
Eiso = 1053 ergs, ˙mwind = 10−5M⊙yr−1, vwind = 103 km/s, and ρre f =
˙mwind
4πR2
re f vwind
.
16
FIG. 11.— Plot of the Lorentz factor over time for simulation γ5a4 (blast wave encountering a density jump of factor 4 at a time and radius corresponding to
the front of the shock ﬂuid Lorentz factor, γenc = 5) in 1D for various resolutions.
The blast wave then encounters the spike at γenc = 10, and the density of the spike is 105ρext(Renc), where ρext is that of Equation 2.
The spike contains the amount of mass Mspike = 0.1M⊙, and is followed by a sudden lower density region of 10−7ρext(Renc). This
is essentially the same setup as that of Mesler et al. (2012) that resulted in light curve ﬂares in their analysis.
We numerically simulate this setup with a resolution in time of roughly 30 snapshots during the encounter to ensure the behavior
of the blast wave within the spike is resolved, and no ﬂare is observed (right panel in Figure 12). The discrepancy between our
results and that of Mesler et al. (2012) is that Mesler et al. (2012) models only swept up mass and does not account for the
radial structure of the blast wave. With this approximation, the mass swept up after the encounter instantaneously mixes with the
mass swept up prior to the encounter (which are actually separated by the contact discontinuity) resulting in an overestimation
of the total mass radiating with the post-encounter Lorentz factor. In addition to the over-estimation of the mass in the forward
shock region, this method also overestimates the Lorentz factor during the encounter. To show this, we analytically modeled
the Lorentz factor evolution as done in Mesler et al. (2012) (who follow Pe’er 2012), and compared it to the numerical results
for the same setup. This is shown in the left panel in Figure 12. This ﬁgure depicts the overestimation of the Lorentz factor
from the assumptions of Mesler et al. (2012), and the underestimation of the Lorentz factor in the homogeneous medium. The
Lorentz factor jumps up immediately after exiting the spike, but there is still no ﬂare from this because initially, only negligible
mass is radiating with this larger Lorentz factor. The light curve from our numerical simulation is plotted in the right panel in
Figure 12, and shows a steepening in post-encounter slope but does not show a ﬂare. No ﬂare is observed because the ﬂuid
behind the contact discontinuity is still traveling at the pre-encounter Lorentz factor immediately after the FS hits spike. The
FS Lorentz factor immediately drops, resulting in it only minimally contributing to the total ﬂux observed. In the swept up
mass approximation, the FS Lorentz factor gradually lowers resulting in it still contributing noticeable amounts to the light curve
immediately after the encounter. This may be the cause of the ﬂares seen in Mesler et al. (2012), however, when calculating the
emission from a spatially resolved blast wave, while taking light travel times into account from different radii and angles, we ﬁnd
that no observable ﬂare is produced.
The light curve shown here is calculated at the X-ray frequency of 5×1017 Hz without the contributions from electron cooling
or absorption. However, we did calculate light curves with the contributions from electron cooling and absorption, and saw no
qualitative differences. We also considered light curves for different frequencies such as optical and radio. Light curves calculated
at optical frequencies exhibited the same behavior as the X-ray light curves. Below the synchrotron self-absorption break a steep
drop was observed following the onset of the shell encounter and a steep rise when the blast wave emerged from the shell.
However, the (thin) emitting region of the blast wave in the optically thick regime was not always fully resolved numerically,
leading to noise in the light curves. Regardless, our conclusions regarding X-ray light curves, which are the main focus of our
study, remain unaffected.
We believe that any model where the blast wave itself is not resolved is fundamentally unsuited to describe features occurring
on time scales ∆R/c. In the non-relativistic case, the relevant light crossing time is of the order of the blast wave radius, R/c,
due to both the absence of relativistic beaming of the emission and the width of the blast wave ∆R becoming a sizable fraction
of the radius.
REFERENCES
Blandford, R. D., & McKee, C. F. 1976, Physics of Fluids, 19, 1130
Burrows, D. N., Romano, P., Falcone, A., Kobayashi, S., Zhang, B., Moretti,
A., O’Brien, P. T., Goad, M. R., Campana, S., Page, K. L., Angelini, L.,
Barthelmy, S., Beardmore, A. P., Capalbi, M., Chincarini, G., Cummings,
J., Cusumano, G., Fox, D., Giommi, P., Hill, J. E., Kennea, J. A., Krimm,
H., Mangano, V., Marshall, F., Mészáros, P., Morris, D. C., Nousek, J. A.,
Osborne, J. P., Pagani, C., Perri, M., Tagliaferri, G., Wells, A. A.,
Woosley, S., & Gehrels, N. 2005, Science, 309, 1833
17
FIG. 12.— Figures for the setup with a spike in the circumburst density proﬁle. The spike is of width 3.15 × 1014 cm at a radius corresponding to γenc = 10,
with an initial density jump of factor 105ρext(Renc), followed by a drop of 10−7ρext(Renc). Left: plot of the forward shock velocity in terms of βγ over radius for
our numerical simulation and the analytical model of Mesler et al. (2012). Right: X-ray light curve calculated from our numerical simulation of this setup.
Dai, Z. G., & Lu, T. 2002, ApJ, 565, L87
De Colle, F., Granot, J., Lopez-Camara, D., & Ramirez-Ruiz, E. 2012, ApJ,
751, 57
Eichler, D., Livio, M., Piran, T., & Schramm, D. N. 1989,
nat, 340, 126
Eldridge, J. J., Genet, F., Daigne, F., & Mochkovitch, R. 2006, MNRAS,
367, 186
Evans, P. A., Beardmore, A. P., Page, K. L., Osborne, J. P., O’Brien, P. T.,
Willingale, R., Starling, R. L. C., Burrows, D. N., Godet, O., Vetere, L.,
Racusin, J., Goad, M. R., Wiersema, K., Angelini, L., Capalbi, M.,
Chincarini, G., Gehrels, N., Kennea, J. A., Margutti, R., Morris, D. C.,
Mountford, C. J., Pagani, C., Perri, M., Romano, P., & Tanvir, N. 2009,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 397, 1177
Falcone, A. D., Morris, D., Racusin, J., Chincarini, G., Moretti, A., Romano,
P., Burrows, D. N., Pagani, C., Stroh, M., Grupe, D., Campana, S.,
Covino, S., Tagliaferri, G., Willingale, R., & Gehrels, N. 2007, ApJ, 671,
1921
Frail, D. A., Kulkarni, S. R., Sari, R., Djorgovski, S. G., Bloom, J. S.,
Galama, T. J., Reichart, D. E., Berger, E., Harrison, F. A., Price, P. A.,
Yost, S. A., Diercks, A., Goodrich, R. W., & Chaffee, F. 2001, ApJ, 562,
L55
Frontera, F., Antonelli, L. A., Amati, L., Montanari, E., Costa, E., Dal
Fiume, D., Giommi, P., Feroci, M., Gennaro, G., Heise, J., Masetti, N.,
Muller, J. M., Nicastro, L., Orlandini, M., Palazzi, E., Pian, E., Piro, L.,
Sofﬁtta, P., Stornelli, M., in ’t Zand, J. J. M., Frail, D. A., Kulkarni, S. R.,
& Vietri, M. 2000, ApJ, 540, 697
Giannios, D. 2006, A&A, 455, L5
Granot, J., & Loeb, A. 2003, ApJ, 593, L81
Granot, J., & Piran, T. 2012, MNRAS, 421, 570
Granot, J., & Sari, R. 2002, ApJ, 568, 820
Gruzinov, A. 2000, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints:0012364
Huang, Y. F., Dai, Z. G., & Lu, T. 1999, MNRAS, 309, 513
Ioka, K., Kobayashi, S., & Zhang, B. 2005, ApJ, 631, 429
Katz, J. I. 1994, ApJ, 422, 248
King, A., O’Brien, P. T., Goad, M. R., Osborne, J., Olsson, E., & Page, K.
2005, ApJ, 630, L113
Kumar, P., & Piran, T. 2000, ApJ, 532, 286
Lee, W. H., Ramirez-Ruiz, E., & López-Cámara, D. 2009, ApJ, 699, L93
Li, L., Liang, E.-W., Tang, Q.-W., Chen, J.-M., Xi, S.-Q., Lü, H.-J., Gao, H.,
Zhang, B., Zhang, J., Yi, S.-X., Lu, R.-J., Lü, L.-Z., & Wei, J.-Y. 2012,
ApJ, 758, 27
Li, Z., & Song, L. M. 2004, ApJ, 614, L17
MacFadyen, A. I., & Woosley, S. E. 1999, The Astrophysical Journal, 524,
262
Margutti, R., Bernardini, G., Barniol Duran, R., Guidorzi, C., Shen, R. F., &
Chincarini, G. 2011, MNRAS, 410, 1064
Masada, Y., Kawanaka, N., Sano, T., & Shibata, K. 2007, ApJ, 663, 437
Maxham, A., & Zhang, B. 2009, ApJ, 707, 1623
Mesler, R. A., Whalen, D. J., Lloyd-Ronning, N. M., Fryer, C. L., &
Pihlström, Y. M. 2012, ApJ, 757, 117
Metzger, B. D., Piro, A. L., & Quataert, E. 2008, MNRAS, 390, 781
Mimica, P., & Giannios, D. 2011, MNRAS, 418, 583
Nakar, E., & Granot, J. 2007, MNRAS, 380, 1744
Nousek, J. A., Kouveliotou, C., Grupe, D., Page, K. L., Granot, J.,
Ramirez-Ruiz, E., Patel, S. K., Burrows, D. N., Mangano, V., Barthelmy,
S., Beardmore, A. P., Campana, S., Capalbi, M., Chincarini, G.,
Cusumano, G., Falcone, A. D., Gehrels, N., Giommi, P., Goad, M. R.,
Godet, O., Hurkett, C. P., Kennea, J. A., Moretti, A., O’Brien, P. T.,
Osborne, J. P., Romano, P., Tagliaferri, G., & Wells, A. A. 2006, The
Astrophysical Journal, 642, 389
O’Brien, P. T., Willingale, R., Osborne, J., Goad, M. R., Page, K. L.,
Vaughan, S., Rol, E., Beardmore, A., Godet, O., Hurkett, C. P., Wells, A.,
Zhang, B., Kobayashi, S., Burrows, D. N., Nousek, J. A., Kennea, J. A.,
Falcone, A., Grupe, D., Gehrels, N., Barthelmy, S., Cannizzo, J.,
Cummings, J., Hill, J. E., Krimm, H., Chincarini, G., Tagliaferri, G.,
Campana, S., Moretti, A., Giommi, P., Perri, M., Mangano, V., &
LaParola, V. 2006, ApJ, 647, 1213
Paczynski, B., & Rhoads, J. E. 1993, ApJ, 418, L5
Panaitescu, A., & Kumar, P. 2002, ApJ, 571, 779
Pe’er, A. 2012, ApJ, 752, L8
Pe’er, A., & Wijers, R. A. M. J. 2006, ApJ, 643, 1036
Perna, R., Armitage, P. J., & Zhang, B. 2006, ApJ, 636, L29
Perna, R., & MacFadyen, A. 2010, ApJ, 710, L103
Proga, D., & Zhang, B. 2006, MNRAS, 370, L61
Ramirez-Ruiz, E., García-Segura, G., Salmonson, J. D., & Pérez-Rendón, B.
2005, ApJ, 631, 435
Rees, M. J., & Meszaros, P. 1998, ApJ, 496, L1
Rhoads, J. E. 1999, ApJ, 525, 737
Sari, R., & Mészáros, P. 2000, ApJ, 535, L33
Sari, R., Narayan, R., & Piran, T. 1996, ApJ, 473, 204
Sedov, L. I. 1959, Similarity and Dimensional Methods in Mechanics (New
York: Academic Press)
Stanek, K. Z., Dai, X., Prieto, J. L., An, D., Garnavich, P. M., Calkins,
M. L., Serven, J., Worthey, G., Hao, H., Dobrzycki, A., Howk, C., &
Matheson, T. 2007, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 654, L21
Taylor, G. 1950, Royal Society of London Proceedings Series A, 201, 159
van Eerten, H., van der Horst, A., & MacFadyen, A. 2012, ApJ, 749, 44
van Eerten, H., Zhang, W., & MacFadyen, A. 2010a, ApJ, 722, 235
van Eerten, H. J., Leventis, K., Meliani, Z., Wijers, R. A. M. J., & Keppens,
R. 2010b, MNRAS, 403, 300
van Eerten, H. J., & MacFadyen, A. I. 2012, ApJ, 751, 155
van Eerten, H. J., Meliani, Z., Wijers, R. A. M. J., & Keppens, R. 2009,
MNRAS, 398, L63
van Marle, A. J., & Keppens, R. 2012, A&A, 547, A3
van Marle, A. J., Langer, N., Achterberg, A., & García-Segura, G. 2006,
A&A, 460, 105
Vlasis, A., van Eerten, H. J., Meliani, Z., & Keppens, R. 2011, MNRAS,
415, 279
von Neumann, J. 1961, Collected works (Oxford: Pergamon)
Wang, X., Huang, Y. F., & Kong, S. W. 2009, A&A, 505, 1213
Wijers, R. A. M. J., & Galama, T. J. 1999, ApJ, 523, 177
Wijers, R. A. M. J., Rees, M. J., & Meszaros, P. 1997, MNRAS, 288, L51
Woosley, S. E. 1993, Astrophys.J., 405, 273
Wygoda, N., Waxman, E., & Frail, D. A. 2011, ApJ, 738, L23
Yost, S. A., Harrison, F. A., Sari, R., & Frail, D. A. 2003, ApJ, 597, 459
Zaninoni, E., Grazia Bernardini, M., Margutti, R., Oates, S., & Chincarini,
G. 2013, ArXiv e-prints 1303.6924
Zhang, B., Fan, Y. Z., Dyks, J., Kobayashi, S., Mészáros, P., Burrows, D. N.,
Nousek, J. A., & Gehrels, N. 2006, ApJ, 642, 354
18
Zhang, W., & MacFadyen, A. 2009, ApJ, 698, 1261
Zhang, W., & MacFadyen, A. I. 2006, ApJS, 164, 255
