Quantitative Evaluation of Machine Learning Explanations:
A Human-Grounded Benchmark
Sina Mohseni,1 Jeremy E. Block,2 Eric D. Ragan, 2
1 Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
2 University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
{sina.mohseni,}@tamu.edu, {j.block,eragan}@uﬂ.edu
Abstract
Research in interpretable machine learning proposes differ-
ent computational and human subject approaches to evaluate
model saliency explanations. These approaches measure dif-
ferent qualities of explanations to achieve diverse goals in de-
signing interpretable machine learning systems. In this paper,
we propose a human attention benchmark for image and text
domains using multi-layer human attention masks aggregated
from multiple human annotators. We then present an evalua-
tion study to evaluate model saliency explanations obtained
using Grad-cam and LIME techniques. We demonstrate our
benchmark’s utility for quantitative evaluation of model ex-
planations by comparing it with human subjective ratings
and ground-truth single-layer segmentation masks evalua-
tions. Our study results show that our threshold agnostic eval-
uation method with the human attention baseline is more ef-
fective than single-layer object segmentation masks to ground
truth. Our experiments also reveal user biases in the subjec-
tive rating of model saliency explanations.
Introduction
With the recent and continuing advancements in robust
deep neural networks (DNN), the prominence of machine
learning techniques for automated decision-making is grow-
ing. In such cases, human experts, operators, and decision-
makers can also take advantage of advanced machine learn-
ing techniques to account for latent features and assist in
taking real-world actions. However, because of the dispar-
ity between the sense-making process in humans and the
computational feature learning of machine learning models,
people require model transparency to be able to understand
and trust machine learning models. Thus, for more effective
human-AI collaboration, advancements in model explain-
ability are needed to support human understanding. This is
the primary goal of recent interdisciplinary research thrusts
in Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI). While a multi-
faceted topic, the ultimate goal is for people to understand
machine models, and it is therefore essential to involve hu-
man feedback and reasoning as a requisite component for
design and evaluation of XAI systems (Mohseni, Zarei, and
Ragan 2019).
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Research on interpretable algorithms has recently pro-
posed various techniques to design inherently interpretable
models (Wu et al. 2018) and generate explanations for
black-box models (Selvaraju et al. 2017). Interpretability
techniques enable human review of model reasoning and
learning representations for their correctness in accordance
to design goals, law and regulations, and safety require-
ments. Such evaluations could potentially prevent adverse
outcomes of AI-based systems—such as unfair and dis-
criminatory decision-making when performing real-world
tasks. However, with the complexity of interpretability tech-
niques and human cognitive biases, the question remains:
how should we choose effective and efﬁcient methods for
the evaluation of machine learning explanations?
Different approaches have been proposed for evaluating
interpretable models and XAI systems at different stages
of system design (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017). In machine
learning research, various computational methods are used
to measure the ﬁdelity of interpretability techniques with
respect to the underlying black-box model (Adebayo et al.
2018; Hooker et al. 2019). On the other hand, in the ﬁeld
of human-computer interaction, human-grounded evaluation
approaches measure human factors such as user satisfaction,
mental model, and trust in XAI systems designed for dif-
ferent tasks. However, there are fundamental differences be-
tween these evaluation approaches. Computational methods
set a precedent to objectively evaluate the model against a
baseline ground truth, yet they lack the ability to quantify
human interpretations. On the other hand, while more de-
scriptive in nature, human subject studies tend to be more
costly, imprecise, and subjective to the task. Another ma-
jor difference between these evaluation methods is that once
the human user is exposed to the evaluation study setup, she
can not unlearn the experience for another round of eval-
uation. These differences raise the need to study the trade-
off between objective ground-truth evaluation and subjective
human-judgment of explanations.
In this paper, we propose a human-attention baseline to
quantitatively evaluate model saliency explanations. Our
publicly available 1 human-grounded benchmark enables
1https://github.com/SinaMohseni/ML-Interpretability-
Evaluation-Benchmark
arXiv:1801.05075v2  [cs.HC]  28 Jun 2020
fast, replicable, and objective execution of evaluation exper-
iments for saliency explanations. To foster the interest of the
machine learning community, we demonstrate our bench-
mark’s utility for quantitative evaluation of model expla-
nations and compare it with the single-layer feature mask
ground truth and human judgment rating evaluations. Our
study results reveal the efﬁciency of threshold-agnostic eval-
uation with a human-attention baseline as compared to pre-
vious methods with binary ground truth masks and labels.
Our experiments also reveal user biases between different
model error types in the subjective rating of explanations.
Background
The evaluation of model explanations and interpretability
techniques can be categorized in different ways (Doshi-
Velez and Kim 2017; Mohseni, Zarei, and Ragan 2019).
For instance, previous works have examined the ﬁdelity of
interpretability techniques to the black-box model (Hooker
et al. 2019; Adebayo et al. 2018), evaluated correctness of
model explanations with ground-truth (Du et al. 2018), as
well as the usefulness of explanations in different tasks and
domains (Kocielnik, Amershi, and Bennett 2019). In this pa-
per, we focus on the trustworthiness of explanations with the
assumption of having a high-ﬁdelity ad-hoc explainer. In this
section, we review two evaluation approaches, human judg-
ment evaluation and ground-truth evaluation, for the trust-
worthiness of machine learning explanations and assess their
advantages and limitations.
Human Judgment Evaluation
A common approach for evaluating machine learning expla-
nations is the direct review of model explanations with end-
users for their subjective feedback. Multiple papers have re-
ported measurements of users’ understanding of explana-
tions as a proxy for usefulness and interpretability of expla-
nations (Lage et al. 2019; Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al. 2018).
Others have measured user-reported trust as a proxy for ex-
planation goodness. For example, Nourani et al. (2019) and
Papenmeier et al. (2019) studied the effects of explanation
meaningfulness and ad-hoc explainer ﬁdelity on user re-
liance. Both studies show that model accuracy and expla-
nation ﬁdelity impact users’ trust in the model and con-
clude that providing nonsensical explanations (i.e., those
that do not align with users’ expectations) may harm users’
reported trust and observed reliance on the system. With
a crowdsourced evaluation approach, Schmidt and Biess-
mann (2019) present quantitative measures for system in-
terpretability and human trust. They propose that analyzing
user interaction time can serve as a proxy for users’ under-
standing of the explanation and level of trust. They recom-
mend that model explanations need to enhance the informa-
tion transfer rate to users, help users establish an intuitive
understanding of system performance and perform well in-
dependent from the user task.
Taking a different perspective, Schneider et al. (2020) in-
spected the effects of deceptive model explanations in a user
study. Their ﬁndings indicate that explanations that are un-
faithful to the black-box model can fool users in accepting
wrong predictions. Following a similar goal, Lakkaragu et
al. (2019) present an approach to generate misleading ex-
planations and a case study with law and criminal justice
domain experts. Their study results found that misleading
explanations were able to signiﬁcantly increase users’ trust.
Conclusively, various research efforts have shown the limi-
tations of human judgment for robust evaluation of machine
learning explanations.
Different projects have run user studies to evaluate the
human understanding of saliency map explanations from
DNNs. For example, Alqaraawi et al. (2020) showed that
instance explanations carry new information to users, but
model behavior remained largely unpredictable for partici-
pants. In other work, Zhang et al. (2019) compared saliency
explanations from multiple networks with human explana-
tions of objects in images. They performed a large crowd-
sourced study to directly compare machine learning and hu-
man explanations and human feedback on model explana-
tions. Their results indicate that the features learned by some
DNN models are more similar to human intuition. However,
it is not clear from their study whether the model generaliz-
ability or the choice of interpretability technique was more
effective on user satisfaction of explanations. To address the
limitations in human judgment evaluation studies, Lertvit-
tayakumjorn and Toni (2019) deﬁned a set of objective eval-
uation tasks for quantitative evaluation of model explana-
tions with respect to different explanatory purposes. They
used three human-grounded tasks to evaluate local expla-
nation methods for their ability to reveal model behavior,
justify model predictions, and help users investigate uncer-
tain predictions. The review of previous research indicates
that the dissonance between machine learning models’ goal
to learn discriminant features and human expectation of log-
ical and common sense explanations undermines the cor-
rectness and completeness of human judgment evaluation
methods.
Evaluation with Ground Truth
An objective way to quantify the correctness of model ex-
planation is to examine it against a ground truth baseline.
Ground truth is often deﬁned by human annotation of rep-
resentative features (i.e., feature masks) and provide a base-
line for quantitative evaluation of explanations quality. Ex-
amples include annotations of the object’s “segmentation
mask” in natural datasets, e.g., (Everingham et al. 2015),
and synthesized datasets, e.g., (Osman, Arras, and Samek
2020), that represent speciﬁc features associated with the
target class. Different similarity metrics, such as Intersection
over Union (IoU) (also called Jaccard index) and mean Av-
erage Precision (mAP), are used to quantify the quality of
model saliency explanations or bounding boxes compared
to the ground truth. For instance, Li et al. (2018) used IoU,
between the model saliency map from a Convolutional Neu-
ral Network (CNN) and the ground truth segmentation mask
from the validation set, to measure their quality as a weakly-
supervised semantic segmentation task. In another work, Du
et al. (2018) calculate the mAP between the bounding boxes
of an objects’ saliency mask and the ground truth bound-
ing boxes to evaluate their interpretability technique as an
object localization task. Similarly, in the text domain, di-
rect comparison of model attention explanations with hu-
man annotated sentences, e.g., evidence supporting the tar-
get label (Zaidan, Eisner, and Piatko 2007), provides an ex-
planation quality score (Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2016).
However, the relationship between the evaluation of ma-
chine learning explanations and the auxiliary tasks, such as
binary object localization and semantic segmentation, is not
clear yet. Our research highlights the aspects of human feed-
back that are missing in the human annotation baselines but
would complement the evaluation of machine learning ex-
planations.
In a review of limitations in threshold-based evaluations
for model saliency map, Choe et al. (2020) present an eval-
uation protocol to include a hyperparameter search for the
τ threshold for generating objects’ “binary mask” from the
saliency score map. However, unlike our proposed evalua-
tion protocol, they do not consider the pixel-wise evaluation
of saliency score maps in the ﬁrst place. Aside from object
segmentation mask baselines that annotate entire features as-
sociated with the target class, perhaps closest work to our
human attention benchmark is Das et al.’s (2017) VQA-HAT
baseline for evaluating saliency maps in visual question and
answering models. They test multiple game-inspired, atten-
tion annotation methods to ask participants to sharpen re-
gions of a blurred image to answer a question. The resulting
baseline is a human attention map that enables object iden-
tiﬁcation but does not indicate whether the necessary or suf-
ﬁcient features are annotated by individual participants. In
comparison to VQA-HAT, our benchmark assembles anno-
tations from multiple unique participants to generate accu-
rate and generalizable human-attention maps. In this paper,
we present a series of evaluation experiments and argue that
our proposed multi-layer human-attention baseline is able
to evaluate the completeness (i.e., the existence of false-
negative explanation errors) and correctness (i.e., the exis-
tence of false-positive explanation errors) of model saliency
maps.
Human-Attention Benchmark
We captured the human annotation of salient features in
order to create a human-grounded benchmark to evaluate
model explanations. Participants were prompted to select
relevant regions in images and phrases in text documents
that they felt most representative of the target subject or
topic, respectively. Figure 1 show examples from the re-
sulting multi-layer ground truth from aggregating annota-
tion from multiple unique annotators for each image. In
comparison to the single-layer object’s segmentation map,
the human-attention benchmark allows for a higher level of
granularity in the evaluation of saliency maps and reﬂects
human attention to features. Also, compared to human judg-
ment rating evaluations, the human attention benchmark en-
ables reproducible and cost-efﬁcient evaluation. The follow-
ing reviews the details of benchmark speciﬁcation, annota-
tion procedure, and data processing.
Table 1: Details of the evaluation benchmark for human at-
tention masks in different datasets.
Domain
Image
Text
Dataset
PASCAL VOC
2012
ILSVRC
2014
20 Newsgroup
IMDB 50K
Number of classes
20
20
2
2
Samples per class
50
5
100
100
Total annotation
sample size
1000
100
200
200
Benchmark Speciﬁcations
The benchmark presents multi-layer masks representing
what features humans expect to be the most important repre-
sentations of a particular class. For each sample, we collect
annotations from 10 unique annotators from Amazon Me-
chanical Turk platform that were instructed to select areas
(in images) or words (in documents) that they deem most
relevant to the target class. The multi-layer mask gener-
ated by aggregating annotations for each individual sample
provides more granular representation of attributed features
compared to the single-layer mask. Note that our method—
collecting multiple user annotations for human-attention
masks—balances the trade-off between objective annotation
of precise feature-masks (i.e., segmentation mask) and sub-
jective human judgment of the representative features. Also,
it is important to mention that this human-attention baseline
evaluates the explanations’ correctness or trustworthiness of
saliency explanations and does not intend to measure the ﬁ-
delity of ad-hoc interpretability techniques to the black box
models.
The development of this benchmark consists of a valida-
tion subset from ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) and PASCAL
VOC2012 (Everingham et al. 2015) image datasets and 20
Newsgroup (Lang 1995) and IMDB (Pang and Lee 2004)
text datasets. Table 1 presents details for the number of
classes and annotated samples from the four datasets in our
explanation evaluation benchmark. For the PASCAL VOC
dataset, 50 randomly selected samples from all 20 classes
are annotated including Vehicles (airplane, bicycle, boat,
boat, bus, car, motorbike, train), Households (bottle, chair,
dining table, potted plant, sofa, TV/monitor), and Animals
(bird, cat, cow, dog, horse, sheep) and other (person). To
create a validation set from the ImageNet dataset, we ran-
domly selected ﬁve images from 20 classes including liv-
ing things (man, woman, cat, dog, bird, ant, elephant, shark,
zebra, ﬂower, tree), indoor objects (chair, computer, ball,
book, phone), outdoor objects (car, ship, airplane, house).
The set includes images covering broad considerations such
as multi-object and complex scenes, co-occurrence of target
object, target object in different scales, and lighting condi-
tions.
For the text domain datasets, 100 randomly selected
movie reviews from each positive and negative classes of
IMDB dataset are selected. Similarly, 100 randomly selected
text documents (with the headers removed from samples)
from the 20 Newsgroup dataset are selected from two cate-
gories of medical (sci.med) and electronic (sci.elect).
(a) Cat
(b) Dog
(c) Sheep
(d) Cow
(e) Train
(f) Motorbike
(g) Horse
(h) TV/Monitor
Figure 1: Examples of human annotations of salient features on images with the target class in the caption. (Top) Input images
with human-attention mask heatmap overlay. (Middle) Single-layer object’s segmentation mask for the target class. (Bottom)
Resulting multi-layer human attention mask. Each image is annotated by 10 unique participants.
Annotation Interface and Procedure
In order to generate multi-layer human-attention explana-
tions, we ask annotators to provide their interpretations of
the salient features that are most meaningful for the spe-
ciﬁc class from the data set. Each sample is annotated with
10 unique annotators recruited from Amazon Mechanical
Turk (AMT). Recruitment advertisement for Human Intel-
ligence Task (HIT) required participants to have at least
1000 previously approved HITs in AMT platform with the
HIT approval rate of above 95%. Recruited participants were
walked through a training slideshow of the task instructions
and interface controls at the beginning of their HIT. As a
control, each training slide was displayed on screen for two
seconds before participants were able to continue to the next
slide. Afterward, they were asked to agree to the IRB ap-
proved information sheet for data collection, and continued
to a set of 12 images or documents for annotation. Partic-
ipants were paid $0.40 for the image and text annotation
HITs to reach an average hourly pay rate of $10 an hour.
We designed two fundamentally similar human annota-
tion interfaces to capture human feedback for all image and
text datasets. Annotators were using an interface with ba-
sic annotation tools in which each document or image was
presented individually. Each annotation HIT started with the
same two samples to serve as attention check and help the
annotator to get adjusted with the interface and task. These
are then followed by 10 samples from the main validation
set. Task instructions prompted participants to select rele-
vant regions in images that they felt most representative to
the target object that could be entire or parts of it but gen-
erally not the background scenery. For image annotations,
the annotators were speciﬁcally asked to use their mouse
to lasso “salient area(s) that explain target “object” in the
image”. Similarly, for text annotations, participants were
prompted to select relevant words in text documents that
they felt most representative of the target topic or class. For
example, for the movie review IMDB dataset, the annotators
were explicitly asked to “select words and phrases which
explain the positive or negative sentiment of the movie re-
view”.
Data Processing and Storage
In order to generate multi-layer feature masks from multiple
user annotations, we run a union operation on all individ-
ual annotation that displays what areas are most frequently
selected by the annotators. Figure 1 presents examples of
resulting human-attention masks from different images. Al-
though speciﬁed in annotation task instructions, we also ap-
plied the exact segmentation mask of the target object’s true
pixels (only for image datasets) to remove the impact of par-
ticipants’ imprecision or hand jitter that might have included
the background pixels. The exact segmentation masks for
images are created by two authors and included in the bench-
mark. Human attention masks for image datasets are stored
in the format of grayscale masks the same size as original
images. The human attention masks for text datasets are
JSON objects with lists of index-word pairs with human-
attention scores in the range of 0 to 1.0. We did not perform
any feature ﬁltering for text annotation samples. The bench-
mark is stored in a public domain and free for research use.
Evaluation Experiments
In this section, we present multiple evaluation experiments
to validate the proposed benchmark with empirical results.
These experiments compare three baselines: 1) human-
attention mask (our approach) as the ground truth, 2) seg-
mentation mask as the ground truth, and 3) human-judgment
(a) Relation between two ground truth measures
(b) Relation between subjective rating and baseline measures
Figure 2: Comparison of averaged evaluation scores (1.0−MAE) between two ground truth baselines and human judgment
rating for each sample. Evaluation scores are not normalized and the black dashed lines shows the ideal regression line with
the slope equal to 1.0 and intercept of zero. (a) Scatterplot of evaluation scores based on segmentation mask (vertical axis)
and human-attention mask (horizontal axis). (b) Scatterplot of evaluation score based on two ground truth baselines and human
judgment rating.
rating for evaluating model saliency explanations. Our goal
is to understand the relationship between the three evalua-
tion methods and communicate the beneﬁts of the proposed
benchmark over other common evaluation methods in the
literature. The series of experiments are based on saliency
maps generated by the Grad-CAM (Selvaraju et al. 2017)
technique for a VGG-19 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014)
image classiﬁer on a subset of 100 validation samples from
the two classes of cat and dog in PASCAL VOC dataset. The
VGG network is pre-trained on ImageNet-1k 2 and tuned
on PASCAL VOC 2007 for the purpose of this evaluation.
All evaluation scores are based on pixel-wise Mean Abso-
lute Error (MAE) between model saliency score map and
the ground truth baseline.
The saliency map error is calculated as the pixel-wise
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) between model saliency score
map and the ground truth mask. We also looked into False
Positive (FP) and False Negative (FN) saliency explanation
errors individually. We calculate FP saliency error as pixel-
wise MAE for the model saliency map scores outside the
object’s segmentation mask (i.e., error in background pix-
els) and FN error as the pixel-wise MAE for model saliency
map scores inside the ground truth mask (i.e., error in target
pixels). In the following subsections, we review details and
share evaluation results from the three methods.
Comparison to Segmentation Mask
In the ﬁrst evaluation experiment, we compare our proposed
human-attention benchmark (multi-layer feature mask) with
the segmentation mask (single-layer feature mask) as the
evaluation ground truth for the set of saliency maps from
2https://pytorch.org/docs/master/torchvision/models.html
Grad-CAM technique. Given the lack of granularity for dis-
tinguishing important features in the segmentation mask, we
hypothesize that the two baselines would result in different
evaluation scores for the same set of inputs.
Intuitively, the difference between the two baselines is
that unlike the segmentation mask, which scores all tar-
get features equally, the human-attention mask gradiates the
“salient” features more than others. To identify the differ-
ence between two evaluation baselines, we calculate eval-
uation scores using both baselines for direct comparison.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst normalize both ground truth masks and
model saliency maps and then calculate the pixel-wise MAE
error between model saliency map and the ground truth
baseline. For example, a saliency map identical to its hu-
man attention mask results in zero MAE error. In the op-
posite situation, with cases having no overlap between the
ground truth mask and the model saliency map, the MAE er-
ror would be 1.0. Note that MAE is a threshold agnostic met-
ric that—unlike Intersection over Union (IoU)—does not re-
quire choosing the τ hyperparameter for generating objects’
binary masks or bounding boxes, see (Choe et al. 2020) for
more discussion. Also, evaluating the saliency score map
(without converting to a binary mask) retains the granular
information in the model explanation.
Results
Figure 2-(a) shows the scatter plot of evaluation
scores (1.0 −MAE) between human-attention and segmen-
tation mask baselines. The two evaluation scores are statis-
tically signiﬁcantly (r = 0.896 , p < 0.001) correlated, as
expected. Using a linear regression test, we ﬁnd a regression
slope of w = 0.896 and intercept of b = 0.48. As seen in
Figure 2-(a), this weight and bias result in different evalua-
tion scores between the two ground truth, especially in the
higher and lower range of scores. To examine the statisti-
cal signiﬁcance of the difference between two ground truth
evaluations, we use an ANCOVA test with a custom model
to the test for homogeneity of regression slopes between the
calculated regression model and the ideal of slope 1.0 with a
zero intercept. The test for homogeneity of regression slopes
fails with a signiﬁcant difference (p < 0.001) between the
two lines indicating that the two evaluation baselines are
not equal. We also look into FP and FN saliency explana-
tion errors individually. The results show that the difference
between the two baselines is only due to FN errors being
treated differently between the two baselines. This was ex-
pected since both baselines measure zero evaluation score
for the saliency explanations outside the ground truth mask.
Comparison to Human Judgment
In the second evaluation experiment, we compare explana-
tion evaluation scores using the two ground truth baselines
with the human ratings of explanation goodness. Subjective
human ratings of the model explanations are commonly used
as a direct approach for evaluating machine learning ex-
planations by providing a numerical rating of explanations
goodness using a simple quantitative measure such Likert
scales. However, subjective measures typically lack preci-
sion and may include user bias. We hypothesize that re-
sults from human-judgment scores will be signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent for both (human-attention mask and object segmenta-
tion mask) ground truth evaluations. We use the same subset
of images and saliency map explanations from Grad-CAM
technique similar to the previous section for the purposes of
this human-subjects study. Figure 3-(Top) shows examples
of heatmap overlays from the Grad-CAM technique used in
the user study.
Human Judgment Interface and Data Collection
We
designed a simple interface to collect user feedback about
the quality of heatmap overlays from the Grad-CAM
saliency explanation technique. The participants started by
reading task instructions followed by a series of images for
review and rate. Given an image from the test set, the tar-
get classiﬁcation, and a heatmap overlay, participants were
instructed to “review and rate the heatmaps which explain
what parts the AI used to make it’s classiﬁcation decision”
and were asked to rate the “goodness” of the AI decision on
the scale of 1 to 10. A total of 200 unique participants’ were
recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk and paid $0.20 per
HIT to review and rate 14 images. The ﬁrst four image rat-
ings (identical images were used for all participants) were
used as training and attention check examples; these were
disregarded for data collection.
Results:
Figure 2-b shows a scatterplot of the evaluation
scores (1.0 −MAE) between human judgment ratings and
ground truth scores from objects’ segmentation masks and
human attention masks. The two regression lines for human-
attention ground truth (in orange) and segmentation mask
(in blue) show both baselines produce different evaluation
scores from the user rating scores. To test for the statistical
signiﬁcance of observed differences, we ﬁrst normalize user
ratings across participants by subtracting each participant’s
Figure 3: Examples of heat-map overlay of saliency maps
using (Top) Grad-cam and (Bottom) LIME techniques used
in the user study for human judgment.
mean rating. Then, we use a Pearson’s correlation test and
linear regression test to compare the human judgment rat-
ing scores and the two ground truth scores. The user ratings
show a moderate-strength correlation with object segmenta-
tion mask baseline (r = −0.121, p = 0.002) and small cor-
relation with human-attention mask baseline (r = −0.306,
p < 0.001). We also observe signs of user bias, noting that
none of the participants rated any of the saliency map in-
stances in the test set below 3-stars even though there are
multiple examples with scores below 0.3 for both ground
truth evaluation types. These cases were speciﬁcally from
the examples with multiple occurrences of the target object
in which the saliency map was only pointing to one of the
target objects. This could potentially indicate a side effect
of lower user attention in reviewing cases with incomplete
saliency explanations.
To
compare
measurements
between
evaluation
ap-
proaches, we run a linear regression analysis and ﬁnd that
the segmentation mask scores ﬁt with a slope of w = 0.313
and intercept of b = 0.268 (Figure 2-b, blue trend line),
and the ﬁt for human-attention mask scores has a slope of
w = 0.428 and intercept of b = 0.210 (Figure 2-b, or-
ange trend line). Note that the difference between the two
linear regression models’ slopes with the ideal slope of 1.0 is
higher with the segmentation-mask baseline. To examine the
statistical signiﬁcance difference between the measures, we
use ANCOVA with a custom model to test for homogeneity
of the regression slopes between the two regression mod-
els as well as between the calculated regression model and
the ideal of slope 1.0 with zero bias. The homogeneity test
fails with a signiﬁcant difference of p < 0.001 between the
two regression models and the ideal line. The analysis indi-
cates the subjective measurement of explanations goodness
produces signiﬁcantly different results from both objective
ground truth measures.
(a) Subjective and ground truth evaluation scores from LIME and
Grad-CAM Explanations.
(b) Subjective and ground truth evaluation scores for samples with
high FP and High FN explanation MAE error.
Figure 4: Discrepancies between averaged human judgment rating of saliency explanations and human-attention baseline eval-
uation. Evaluation scores are not normalized and the black dashed lines shows the ideal regression line with the slope equal
to -1.0 and intercept of zero. (a) Participants evaluate saliency explanations from LIME and Grad-CAM differently. (b) Par-
ticipants evaluate saliency explanations’ FP error (model looking at background pixels) differently than FN errors (model not
looking at target pixels).
Discussion
In this section, we review and discuss the evaluation exper-
iments and open problems around model explanation eval-
uation. The evaluation experiment results showed that the
human-attention benchmark has allowed for a higher level of
granularity in the evaluation of saliency maps and reﬂected
human attention to the features in comparison to the single-
layer object’s segmentation map. As compared to the human
judgment rating evaluations, we observed signs of partici-
pants’ bias in their ratings.
Implications of Results
We ran human-subject experi-
ments to understand the differences between the subjec-
tive and objective evaluation of saliency explanations. Al-
though the evaluation results from the three methods had
positive correlations, the experimental results showed signif-
icant differences among all evaluation scores. The difference
in scores was mainly due to the clear non-uniform distribu-
tion of weights in human attention masks while the segmen-
tation mask weights are uniformly distributed for all features
(e.g., pixels, words).
While segmentation mask benchmarks are mainly used
for object segmentation evaluation and weakly supervised
object localization (Li et al. 2018; Choe et al. 2020), the
human-attention baseline reﬂects human factors in feature
attribution. For example, in annotations of living things,
users were more likely to select facial features as impor-
tant features while the segmentation mask offers a uniformly
weighted single-layer mask. This is reﬂected in the evalua-
tion results with human judgment with participants’ ratings
of explanations being closer to the human-attention baseline
rather than the segmentation mask baseline. Due to the same
effect, evaluation results with the human-attention baseline
could be extended to better anticipate user acceptance and
trust in model explanations when putting on different appli-
cations.
Human Biases in Rating
We explored the human judg-
ment evaluation results to ﬁnd other possible external or in-
ternal factors that could affect participants’ subjective rat-
ings. For example, human judgment ratings may include
user biases toward visual appearance or completeness of
saliency maps resulting in incorrect ratings. We reviewed
and compared the results from human judgment for Grad-
CAM and LIME explanations to identify possible biases.
Also, we reviewed the results to assess possible participants’
biases toward model explanation FP and FN error types.
To evaluate the effect of visual appearance of saliency
explanations, we compare participants’ rating of saliency
map explanations from LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin
2016) technique to Grad-CAM explanations on the same
subset of images and the same classiﬁer. The saliency expla-
nations from the LIME technique (Figure 3-(Bottom)) are
visually more chunky and pixelated (mainly due to use of
super pixels in LIME’s pipeline) compared to smooth con-
cept activation maps from Grad-CAM technique (Figure 3-
(Top)). We analyze results after running a new user study
to collect participants’ subjective ratings of LIME explana-
tions.
We used two linear regression models to compare partic-
ipants’ ratings between the two groups, see 4-(a). We ﬁnd
the slope of w = −0.428 and intercept of b = 0.789 for
the user ratings on samples with LIME saliency map (Fig-
ure 4-(a) green trend line) and slope of w = −0.607 and in-
tercept of b = 0.947 for samples with Grad-CAM saliency
map (Figure 4-(a), yellow trend line). We would have ex-
pected to see the similar regression slopes between the two
groups if the users were evaluating both saliency map ex-
planation types similarly. However, the test for homogeneity
between the two regression slopes shows a signiﬁcant differ-
ence (p < 0.001) between the two model error types. This
indicates that users rated the saliency maps differently, al-
though ground truth evaluation score (Figure 4-(a), y axis)
for both sets of samples.
We then analyze participants’ rating behavior with respect
to different explanation error types. We ﬁrst divided the sam-
ples for the test set into two groups with high FP (when the
model is looking at background pixels) explanation error and
high FN explanation errors (when the model is missing fore-
ground pixels). Using linear regression models, we ﬁnd the
slope of w = −0.121 and intercept of b = 0.265 for the
samples with FP explanation error score (Figure 4-(b) yel-
low trend line) and slope of w = −0.306 and intercept of
b = 0.525 for samples with high FN explanations error score
(Figure 4-(b), green trend line). We would have expected to
see the similar regression slopes between the two groups if
the users were evaluating both saliency error types similarly.
However, the test for homogeneity between the two regres-
sion slopes shows a signiﬁcant difference (p < 0.001) be-
tween the two explanation error types. This indicates that
users pay less attention to FP explanation errors and in turn,
are more critical for FN explanation errors. Looking at im-
age samples from the user study, these images included sev-
eral examples in which the target object was on a smaller
scale and the model saliency map was largely exceeded to
the background pixels.
Reproducibility and Objectivity Trade-off
One way to
categorize different evaluation measures is by their objectiv-
ity and reproducibility of results. As implemented in this pa-
per, users’ subjective rating of explanations could collect re-
sults for correctness and goodness of model generated expla-
nations. Ribeiro et al. (2016) presented a case for correction
of model explanation in which users reject wrong features
and add new features for quantitative evaluation of model
explanations. A different method is to collect user feedback
through the direct comparison of explanations from multiple
interpretability techniques. For example, users could review
several options to choose the best machine-generated expla-
nation and provide justiﬁcations for their choices. However,
although these methods can provide detailed insights, sub-
jective user feedback is not reusable for new models and
interpretability techniques. This limitation indeed exists in
studies for evaluating XAI systems in different applications
and domains (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017), including tasks
and scenarios concerned with the fairness of the decision-
making system.
On the other hand, objective evaluation that utilizes
ground truth, provides quantitative and reproducible results,
yet lacks the guidance of human correctness and goodness
scores that show which improvements would be most sig-
niﬁcant. Our benchmarks bridge the trade-off between ob-
jectivity and subjectivity of a baseline to satisfy both evalu-
ation aspects.
Limitations and Future Work
A limitation of creating
this human-attention benchmark is the annotation cost for
multi-level human explanation masks. However, annotation
cost could be justiﬁed when compared to repeated novel
rounds of evaluations for subjective human judgments. As
typically, the iterative design and evaluation of machine
learning based systems require multiple rounds of training
and test. Our human attention benchmark can signiﬁcantly
reduce evaluation costs over design cycles. Further, an open
question in creating human-attention benchmarks is how to
standardize all annotators’ perception of explanation when
performing the annotation task. In our future work, we plan
to study annotators behavior on objects in different size and
pose to learn general patterns in human attention. This could
potentially help to optimize the number of annotators for
each sample. Lastly, we are interested in examining the use
case of the human-attention benchmark for tuning models to
improve prediction rationale and its effects on explanation
quality.
Conclusion
We present a new model-explanation evaluation benchmark
for multiple datasets in image and text domains. Our bench-
mark is designed for quantitative evaluation of saliency map
explanations based on human attention on features. This
human-grounded benchmark enables fast, replicable, and
objective execution of evaluation experiments for saliency
explanations. We studied the relationships and trade-offs be-
tween two different human-grounded evaluation approaches
(i.e., single-layer annotation mask and human subjective
feedback) to present the efﬁciency of the proposed human
attention baseline. Our study results indicated the differ-
ence between threshold-agnostic evaluation with a human-
attention baseline as compared to previous methods with bi-
nary ground truth masks and labels. Our experiments also re-
vealed user biases on different explanations’ visual appear-
ance and error types in the subjective rating of explanations.
Acknowledgements
This research is based on work supported by the DARPA
XAI program under Grant #N66001-17-2-4031 and NSF
award #1900767.
References
[Adebayo et al. 2018] Adebayo, J.; Gilmer, J.; Muelly, M.;
Goodfellow, I.; Hardt, M.; and Kim, B. 2018. Sanity checks
for saliency maps. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, 95059515. Curran Associates, Inc.
[Alqaraawi et al. 2020] Alqaraawi, A.; Schuessler, M.; Weiß,
P.; Costanza, E.; and Berthouze, N.
2020.
Evaluating
saliency map explanations for convolutional neural net-
works: A user study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.00772.
[Choe et al. 2020] Choe, J.; Oh, S. J.; Lee, S.; Chun, S.;
Akata, Z.; and Shim, H. 2020. Evaluating weakly super-
vised object localization methods right. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 3133–3142.
[Das et al. 2017] Das, A.; Agrawal, H.; Zitnick, L.; Parikh,
D.; and Batra, D. 2017. Human attention in visual ques-
tion answering: Do humans and deep networks look at the
same regions? Computer Vision and Image Understanding
163:90–100.
[Deng et al. 2009] Deng, J.; Dong, W.; Socher, R.; Li, L.-J.;
Li, K.; and Fei-Fei, L. 2009. ImageNet: A large-scale hier-
archical image database. In CVPR. IEEE.
[Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017] Doshi-Velez, F., and Kim, B.
2017. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08608.
[Du et al. 2018] Du, M.; Liu, N.; Song, Q.; and Hu, X. 2018.
Towards explanation of dnn-based prediction with guided
feature inversion. In KDD.
[Everingham et al. 2015] Everingham, M.; Eslami, S. M. A.;
Van Gool, L.; Williams, C. K. I.; Winn, J.; and Zisserman,
A.
2015.
The pascal visual object classes challenge: A
retrospective.
International Journal of Computer Vision
111(1):98–136.
[Hooker et al. 2019] Hooker, S.; Erhan, D.; Kindermans, P.-
J.; and Kim, B.
2019.
A benchmark for interpretability
methods in deep neural networks. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 9734–9745.
[Kocielnik, Amershi, and Bennett 2019] Kocielnik,
R.;
Amershi, S.; and Bennett, P. N.
2019.
Will you accept
an imperfect ai? exploring designs for adjusting end-user
expectations of ai systems.
In Proceedings of the 2019
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
1–14.
[Lage et al. 2019] Lage, I.; Chen, E.; He, J.; Narayanan, M.;
Kim, B.; Gershman, S. J.; and Doshi-Velez, F. 2019. Human
evaluation of models built for interpretability. In Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Human Computation and
Crowdsourcing, volume 7, 59–67.
[Lakkaraju and Bastani 2019] Lakkaraju, H., and Bastani, O.
2019.
” how do i fool you?”: Manipulating user trust
via misleading black box explanations.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.06473.
[Lang 1995] Lang, K. 1995. Newsweeder: Learning to ﬁlter
netnews. In ICML, 331–339.
[Lei, Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2016] Lei, T.; Barzilay, R.; and
Jaakkola, T. S. 2016. Rationalizing neural predictions. In
EMNLP.
[Lertvittayakumjorn and Toni 2019] Lertvittayakumjorn, P.,
and Toni, F.
2019.
Human-grounded evaluations of ex-
planation methods for text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP),
5198–5208.
[Li et al. 2018] Li, K.; Wu, Z.; Peng, K.-C.; Ernst, J.; and Fu,
Y. 2018. Tell me where to look: Guided attention inference
network. In CVPR.
[Mohseni, Zarei, and Ragan 2019] Mohseni, S.; Zarei, N.;
and Ragan, E. D.
2019.
A multidisciplinary survey and
framework for design and evaluation of explainable ai sys-
tems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.11839.
[Nourani et al. 2019] Nourani, M.; Kabir, S.; Mohseni, S.;
and Ragan, E. D. 2019. The effects of meaningful and mean-
ingless explanations on trust and perceived system accuracy
in intelligent systems.
In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
ference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing, vol-
ume 7, 97–105.
[Osman, Arras, and Samek 2020] Osman, A.; Arras, L.; and
Samek, W. 2020. Towards ground truth evaluation of visual
explanations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07258.
[Pang and Lee 2004] Pang, B., and Lee, L. 2004. A sen-
timental education: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity
summarization based on minimum cuts. In Proceedings of
the 42nd annual meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics, 271. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Papenmeier, Englebienne, and Seifert 2019] Papenmeier,
A.; Englebienne, G.; and Seifert, C.
2019.
How model
accuracy and explanation ﬁdelity inﬂuence user trust. IJCAI
Workshop on Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) 2019.
[Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al. 2018] Poursabzi-Sangdeh,
F.;
Goldstein, D. G.; Hofman, J. M.; Vaughan, J. W.; and
Wallach, H.
2018.
Manipulating and measuring model
interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07810.
[Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016] Ribeiro, M. T.; Singh,
S.; and Guestrin, C. 2016. Why should i trust you?: Ex-
plaining the predictions of any classiﬁer. In KDD. ACM.
[Schmidt and Biessmann 2019] Schmidt, P., and Biessmann,
F. 2019. Quantifying interpretability and trust in machine
learning systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08558.
[Schneider et al. 2020] Schneider, J.; Handali, J.; Vlachos,
M.; and Meske, C. 2020. Deceptive ai explanations: Cre-
ation and detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.07641.
[Selvaraju et al. 2017] Selvaraju, R. R.; Cogswell, M.; Das,
A.; Vedantam, R.; Parikh, D.; and Batra, D. 2017. Grad-
cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-
based localization. In 2017 IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV), 618–626. IEEE.
[Simonyan and Zisserman 2014] Simonyan, K., and Zisser-
man, A. 2014. Very deep convolutional networks for large-
scale image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556.
[Wu et al. 2018] Wu, M.; Hughes, M. C.; Parbhoo, S.; Zazzi,
M.; Roth, V.; and Doshi-Velez, F. 2018. Beyond sparsity:
Tree regularization of deep models for interpretability. In
Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
[Zaidan, Eisner, and Piatko 2007] Zaidan, O.; Eisner, J.; and
Piatko, C. 2007. Using annotator rationales to improve ma-
chine learning for text categorization. In Human language
technologies 2007: The conference of the North American
chapter of the association for computational linguistics;
proceedings of the main conference, 260–267.
[Zhang et al. 2019] Zhang, Z.; Singh, J.; Gadiraju, U.; and
Anand, A.
2019.
Dissonance between human and ma-
chine understanding. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-
Computer Interaction 3(CSCW):1–23.
