1 
 
IPPOG – Bridging the gap between science education at school and modern scientific research 
 
Barbora Bruant Gulejova (on behalf of the IPPOG Collaboration) 
  
 
Abstract 
 
The International Particle Physics Outreach Group (IPPOG) has been making concerted and systematic efforts to 
present and popularise particle physics across all audiences and age groups since 1997. Today the scientific 
community has in IPPOG a strategic pillar in fostering long-term, sustainable support for fundamental research 
around the world. One of the main tools IPPOG has been offering to the scientific community, teachers and 
educators for almost 10 years is the Resource Database (RDB), an online platform containing a collection of high 
quality engaging education and outreach materials in particle physics and related sciences.  
 
1. Introduction 
 
Main challenges the scientific community faces currently are the threat to the financial support of large 
experimental endeavours and falling interest of young people to engage in studies of STEM (science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics), especially physics.  
In general physics is less popular than other natural sciences, suffering a stigma of being a science that is very 
mathematical, abstract, and complicated. It is perceived as disconnected from real world. Most of the students 
who claim to love science do not mean physics, not realizing how fun physics can be.  
It is important to break these stereotypes based on the misperception of physics in society. Physics is a pillar of 
all natural sciences. Physics is about understanding the basic laws of nature, the world we live in. It explains how 
the world around us and within us functions. This fundamental definition of physics does not often come across 
to students from their physics school curriculum. 
Solving physics problems satisfies curiosity, develops analytical thinking and promotes an inquiring mindset. Many 
problems require creativity and out-of-the-box thinking to be mastered and this leads to a set of skills useful in all 
aspects of life. Moreover, people with a background in physics and related STEM subjects are highly sought after 
in many professions, including business and industry. These skills provide a solid basis for a successful career.  
Today science, technology and innovation are among the most powerful forces driving social change and 
development. Natural sciences are also at the heart of producing new solutions to many of the challenges posed, 
for example, by the increasing risk of climate change, poor water management, or misguided applications of new 
technology. Therefore, physics and related sciences play an important role also in achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals of UN Agenda 2030 [1]. A new generation of STEM specialists must prepare innovative 
solutions for tomorrow, one in which both genders have an equally important role to play. Moreover, future 
particle physics / high-energy physics projects will require a long-term, worldwide commitment of significant 
monetary resources and human expertise.  
Today in Europe less than 20% of the young people choose STEM studies, while the number of STEM jobs grows 
three times faster than any other job. If we do not change something, there will be 7 million new European jobs 
in STEM by 2025 and not enough people to fill them [2].  
A nation-wide German survey in 2000 [3] has revealed that almost 70% of the students drop physics at the earliest 
possible opportunity, which in some parts of the country already happens at an age of 15 to 16 years. Why is that? 
Let’s start our analysis by stating that the only modern physics topic students are confronted with by that age is 
the physics of nuclear reactors. 
 
2 
 
1.1. Rare exposure of society to modern physics 
 
We live in a modern world surrounded by technologies resulting from the greatest scientific discoveries of the 
past decades that are underpinned by modern physics of 20th and 21st centuries. The cell phones and computers 
upon which we rely were developed thanks to a fundamental understanding of the Standard Model of Particle 
Physics. Despite this, the physics taught in most of the high school classrooms is stuck in the past. “I always found 
it dry and removed from real world, but I learned that physics can be extremely fascinating and relevant, and I 
now realized that I actually enjoy physics, just not what is taught in our school curriculum.”, claims a 16-years old 
participant of the programme ‘Creating Ambassadors for Science in Society’ [4] organized under the umbrella of 
the International Particle Physics Outreach Group (IPPOG) [5]. 
The main reference for physics teachers around the world today, the Halliday and Resnick collection known as 
Fundamentals of Physics [6], dates from the late 1950s [7]. We teach knowledge from centuries ago, and yet the 
questions, which inspire great fascination in youngsters (and even all of us!) are explained by contemporary 
physics, in particular particle physics, astrophysics, cosmology and quantum physics.  
Perception of physics by students today is very different from the one of Marie Curie: “I am among those who 
think that science has a great beauty. A scientist in his laboratory is not only a technician: he is also a child placed 
before natural phenomena which impress him like a fairy tale.”  
 
1.2. Why understanding of particle physics by a broad population matters 
 
Every child is a natural scientist, very curious with desire to learn. Kids often ask fundamental questions, such as 
“what are we made from?”, “what is the universe made of?”, “what is its origin?”, “how has it come to be what it 
is today?”, “what will be its end?”, “why is the sun shining?”… Such questions have made human beings think 
about how the universe works and impel us to try to unveil its origins and evolution, and by investigating them 
science has advanced.  
All around us and everywhere in the universe, particles bind, separate, are transformed or disintegrate. This is 
why the moon revolves around the Earth, the stars shine, magnets attract or repel each other, objects fall etc. 
Particles and their interactions are at the origin of our existence. Particle physics brings insights into the tiniest 
dimensions of life. It enables us to acquire deeper knowledge about the structure of matter, and hence, of the 
world around us. Particle physicists ask the biggest scientific questions imaginable and then devise ways to answer 
those questions.  
The Standard Model of particle physics [8] is the current best theory for the fundamental structure of matter. It 
describes the results of essentially all terrestrial experiments in the physics of the microworld to a very high level 
of precision. Even though it is not yet complete and in quest for a more complete theory physicists work on 
understanding neutrinos, dark matter, antimatter and more, there is no justification to cloak particle physics in 
aura of mystery and to explain it only to a handful of privileged students.  
Almost 50 years after the Standard Model was developed,  in typical curricula worldwide physics lessons often 
take the form of a history class with live demos and occasional hands-on experiments. This gives an impression 
that physics’ greatest discoveries were in the past. Most of the students end up finishing high school believing 
that there are only 3 elementary particles (electrons, protons, neutrons) and only knowing 2 types of forces 
(gravitational and electromagnetic) all as classically described. They never learn that the electron has five other 
sibling particles - electron neutrino, muon, muon neutrino, tau, and tau neutrino - which are collectively called 
leptons. They never learn that everything in the universe, from the cereal they eat for breakfast to the galaxies 
above, is fundamentally composed of just two quarks and one lepton. They will never learn that everything has 
the same origin and we are all stardust (see Figure 1).  
3 
 
 
Figure 1: T-shirts from CERN’s souvenir shop [9] stating “My mother is a Supernova” and “I am the best you 
can make out of quarks and electrons”. All elements, except the three lightest, are products of reactions 
between atoms that take place inside stars. When a star dies in an explosion known as a supernova, heavier 
elements are thrown into space. Some have ended up on Earth over the last four billion years that our planet 
has existed. We are all stardust! For a more complete picture of the origins of atoms in the body see [10]. 
 
Particle physics can bring students access to new worlds and ways of thinking. When they access this microscopic 
world, students gain a better understanding of the structure of matter as well as that of new technologies. Particle 
physics gives them a new way to read the world around them, a fresh way to look at nature. If every child on this 
planet deeply understood the concept that our bodies are made of the same particles as everything else on the 
Earth and in the universe, that we are all part of Nature and everything is interconnected in the universe, greater 
respect towards Nature might be fostered. 
Exposure to modern physics such as particle physics and its technological applications increases the interest of 
students in physics and their perception of today’s role of physics and physicists in society. The impact of different 
types of extra-curricular activities in particle physics (e.g. exhibitions, the physics masterclass programme [11] 
and teaching [12]) on students aged 16-19 years in UK and Germany has been evaluated [13], clearly showing 
that their general interest in physics has increased very strongly. Students would like to deal more often with 
modern physics at school and criticized the lack of practical experiments.  
Particle physics permits the demonstration of the scientific method, to show how advanced science is, where it is 
going, and how it works, and points out the technological advances in those processes. It also shows students 
how dynamic and collaborative research is, how experimentation has become both crucial and harder to 
accomplish. They learn the process through which science develops theories and validates models, how 
experiments are designed and built in a worldwide collaborative manner in order to validate theories and models 
through the analysis of data from large experiments.  
Teaching more contemporary physics in schools may lead students to understand why so many investments, 
financial and personal, are made to develop laboratory facilities such as the LHC – one of the largest enterprises 
in mankind’s history. Besides, it is important to discuss the experiments which are conducted at the LHC, so that 
some of the wrong information distributed by the communication media can be demystified, such as rumours of 
the possibility of the Earth being destroyed by a black hole created in the LHC, headlines about doomsday 
machine, etc.  
 
1.3. Particle Physics at schools today 
 
The importance of the efforts to broaden the spectrum of modern physics available at schools has been recently 
officially recognised by the full particle physics community. The European Strategy for Particle Physics Update 
2020 recommended the teaching of the Standard Model in school classrooms: “The particle physics community 
should work with educators and relevant authorities to explore the adoption of basic knowledge of elementary 
particles and their interactions in the regular school curriculum.” [14]  
In the last decades scientists and educators started to develop materials suited to bring high school students in 
contact with the fascinating world of the fundamental building blocks of matter and their interactions, for example 
4 
 
a plethora of resources developed by German Netzwerk Teilchenwelt, and requested by thousands of teachers 
all over Germany [12, 15, 16, 17] and other educational resources available for introducing the LHC in the 
classroom [18]. The only resources with broad reach to worldwide physics curricula are the International 
Baccalaureate (IB) Physics books [19, 20, 21] prepared for the purposes of IB Diploma Programme [22]. This is a 
two-year educational programme primarily aimed at 16-to-19 year olds, but IB offers four programmes for 
students aged 3 to 19. It was developed in the early to mid-1960s in Geneva, Switzerland, by a group of 
international educators. Today there are 7,002 IB programmes being offered worldwide, across 5,284 schools in 
158 countries and nearly 30 000 students are assessed each year by the IB Organisation. If we add to this the 10 
000 teachers trained at CERN since 2006 impacting more than a million of students [23], 4000 school students 
performing hands-on experiments at CERN’s S’COOL LAB each year [24], 70 000 school children visiting CERN 
every year, 13 000 pupils in 60 countries yearly becoming scientists for a day through Physics Masterclasses [11] 
and many more participating in different activities (e.g. on cosmic rays [25, 26]) and even many enthusiastic 
teachers who make an effort to teach and promote extra-curriculum activities in particle physics, we would still 
end up with a tiny portion (smaller by two orders of magnitude) compared to world population of high-school 
age. This in big part explains the huge gap between science and society today, and the lack of awareness, 
understanding and trust of the general public and decision makers regarding science and its importance to society, 
leading to financial austerity for large scientific projects, low interest in the younger generations to become 
physicists, and a more general mistrust in science. 
Albert Einstein was very clear on this subject:  “It is crucially important that the general public has the opportunity 
to inform itself knowledgeably and intelligibly on the endeavors and results of scientific research. Restricting 
scientific findings to a small group of people weakens the philosophical spirit of a nation and leads to its 
intellectual impoverishment.” (Princeton 1948).  
 
1.4. Importance of outreach  
 
It is for the reasons outlined above that current, well-focused concerted and global outreach and communication 
efforts to engage the public are already today of vital strategic importance. 
Until we update our school curricula, science outreach and extra-curriculum activities are the only possibility to 
bridge the gap between science and society and bring a betterunderstanding of our fascinating world to schools 
and the public. IPPOG [5] has been making a concerted and systematic effort to present and popularise particle 
physics across all audiences and age groups for almost 25 years and today the scientific community has in IPPOG 
a strategic pillar for bringing contemporary physics and society closer. 
 
2. IPPOG, a strategic pillar for particle physics outreach worldwide 
 
In this chapter, IPPOG’s mission and its different roles are introduced, namely of a network, an international 
collaboration, an exchange forum, a key partner for promoting scientific mission globally, and a strategic pillar to 
foster support for fundamental research. 
 
2.1. IPPOG’s mission 
 
The International Particle Physics Outreach Group’s principal aim is to maximise the impact of education and 
outreach efforts related to particle physics. It contributes to global efforts in strengthening the cultural awareness 
in the understanding and support of particle physics and related sciences, in raising scientific literacy in society, 
educating the public on the values of basic research and in developing and training the next generation of 
researchers, scientists and engineers.  
In particular, IPPOG’s purpose is to raise standards of global outreach and informal science education efforts of 
particle physics, to communicate its results and findings to the public, to bring new discoveries in all areas of 
5 
 
particle physics research to young people and to convey to the public that the beauty of nature is indeed 
becoming understandable from the interactions of its most fundamental constituents - the elementary particles.  
 
2.2. IPPOG’s roles 
 
IPPOG is a network of scientists, researchers, science educators, explainers and communication specialists active 
across the globe in outreach for particle physics. They come from prominent national or international professional 
physics centres, societies and laboratories engaged in particle physics research, and from major particle physics 
experiments. The diversity of their cultural and educational backgrounds brings a large and important variety of 
skills to the table, which permit for the effective development of novel outreach activities with maximal impact. 
IPPOG members represent links to several national-level science networks. This constitutes IPPOG’s global 
network of laboratories, institutions, organizations and individuals all passionate about particle physics. The 
expertise of IPPOG’s members spans all aspects of collider and non-collider research, including astroparticle 
physics and accelerator and detector technology. 
As CERN’s then Director General Prof. Chris Llewellyn Smith explained in September 1997 at the first-ever EPPOG 
(European Particle Physics Outreach Group, IPPOG’s predecessor) meeting [27], “the particle physics community 
has a moral obligation to inform the public on its activities. To do this well, experiences must be shared among 
countries in view of the need to optimize the use of resources.” He also highlighted the need of being selective 
on future actions and collective decision-making regarding outreach efforts, giving the example of informing 
school children as a good long-range investment. Out of this obligation to communicate effectively with the public 
in a targeted way and a need to pool resources, EPPOG was born. It was formed in 1997 under the joint auspices 
of the European Committee for Future Accelerators (ECFA) and the High Energy Particle Physics Board of the 
European Physical Society. EPPOG widened its regional scope to become an international player in 2005 with the 
development of the International Particle Physics Masterclass programme [11], and became officially renamed as 
the International Particle Physics Outreach Group (IPPOG) in 2011.  
With the growing global scale of IPPOG activities, and taking into consideration recommendations of the 2013 
European Particle Physics Strategy Update, IPPOG became an international collaboration based on a 
memorandum of understanding in 2016. The signature for each country is provided by a single entity (e.g. a 
ministry, lead scientific institution, or in some cases a university that has a national leading role) that oversees or 
coordinates the efforts of particle physics outreach in that country. The person signing for an international 
experiment is typically the collaboration spokesperson or a member of management responsible for the outreach 
programme. CERN’s signature comes from the head of International Relations. These bodies each select 
representatives who are identified as main actors in the field of particle physics outreach.  
Today the IPPOG Collaboration comprises 33 members: 26 countries, 6 experiments and CERN as an international 
laboratory. Thanks to its ever-growing membership and global coverage, IPPOG fosters the recognition and raises 
the value of science outreach around the world. It increases international exposure, enables centralised and 
coordinated efforts through partnerships. 
IPPOG is also a forum for the exchange of information and best practices with colleagues from around the world, 
a brainstorming platform, a source of ideas and inspiration, a ground for training and skill-development (for public 
talks etc.), a platform providing access to programmes for schools, and a place to find partners for common 
outreach and education projects and publications.  
In addition to its bi-annual meetings, IPPOG forum members are active in different working groups focusing on 
specific issues and developing best practices to be shared within IPPOG and other outreach and education forums 
and experts around the globe. These are for example ‘Bringing Masterclasses to New Countries’, ‘Explaining 
Particle Physics Hot Topics to a Lay Audience’, ‘Outreach of Applications for Society’ and ‘Exhibits and Public 
Events’.  
For particle physics and scientific community IPPOG represents a key partner for promoting and enabling their 
scientific mission and activities globally, a platform for engagement on a global level, building partnerships within 
the community and across communities, and for supporting the broader scientific objectives of particle physics 
and its role in the society on global level. The worldwide particle physics community has in IPPOG a strong partner 
at hand when reaching out to the wider society in diverse ways that are adapted for every target audience. 
6 
 
IPPOG is a strategic pillar for future of particle physics and scientific community and is helping to foster long-term, 
sustainable support for fundamental scientific research around the world. IPPOG develops programmes and 
strategies to address the current and future challenges of the particle physics and scientific community, such as 
the declining interest in STEM-related studies, lack of support of fundamental research and mistrust in science. 
IPPOG’s scientific education and outreach activities aim to improve public understanding and appreciation of the 
benefits of fundamental research, to spark interest and enthusiasm among young people, and to strengthen the 
integration of science in society. IPPOG not only motivates, inspires, and educates our youth in the field of particle 
physics, but it develops personal awareness of the value of science and of the process of evidence-based decision 
making, regardless of age or discipline. IPPOG helps to establish broad public support, as well as the commitment 
of key stakeholders and policy makers throughout Europe and the world for the future large-scale projects of 
particle physics community. More details on IPPOG’s strategic mission in tackling the future challenges in particle 
physics education and outreach both in the context of the European Particle Physics Strategic Update (EPPSU) 
and in general for our society are described in [28]. 
In a confusing world of endangered reasoning, IPPOG works to strengthen the trust in science and its method of 
evidence-based decision making to offer future generations a meaningful basis that generates supportive 
structure in their life. Without compromising established methods, IPPOG is exploring new paths to engage 
citizens – especially the young. Reaching out to high-school students and their teachers to convey the methods 
and tools used in fundamental science is a strong investment in the future. While only a fraction of young students 
will become scientists, and fewer still will become particle physicists, all will become ambassadors for the scientific 
method and evidence-based decision-making. Younger audiences will be more educated and appreciative of the 
importance of research, and thus more suited to make informed decisions about science and scientific questions 
for their nations and their peoples in the future [29]. 
 
2.3. IPPOG Activities 
 
Current IPPOG activities include the ever-growing and well-established International Masterclasses on Particle 
Physics programme [11], the outreach Resource Database (see chapter 3)[37], the Global Cosmic Rays 
experiments at schools platform currently in development [30], support for exhibitions and activities at public 
events and festivals (e.g. Colours of Ostrava in Czech Republic [31], Universal Science [32]), and different topical 
programmes and competitions targeting young and diverse audiences (like Particles4U [33], Girls, do Physics! 
[34], Creating Ambassadors for Science in Society [4], Cascade competitions in UK [35] and Slovakia [36] etc…). 
These diverse activities allow IPPOG to bridge the gap between science education at school and modern scientific 
research by inspiring, motivating and educating an especially young audience, offering hands-on experience and 
connecting physics to real life while using cutting edge technologies.  
 
2.3.1. Physics Masterclasses 
 
The Particle Physics Masterclasses programme [11] has been IPPOG’s flagship activity for the last 15 years. 
Research institutes and universities around the world invite students and their teachers for a day-long programme 
to experience life at the forefront of basic research. The programme gives students the opportunity to become a 
particle physicist for a day by analysing real data collected by the experiments at the CERN LHC and other particle 
physics facilities (e.g. Japanese Belle II, American MINERvA neutrino or particle cancer therapy masterclasses). 
The International Masterclasses (IMC) run every Spring and attract each year more than 13 000 high school 
students in 60 countries. Participants can explore the fundamental forces and building blocks of nature and are 
informed about the new age of exciting discoveries in particle physics, e.g. the discovery of the Higgs boson. 
Moreover, they can actively get a flavour of cutting-edge research and improve their understanding of science 
and the scientific research process while mirroring exactly the activities of working particle physicist. The 
programme offers authentic experience and is a valuable addition to physics education at school, thus stimulating 
the students’ interest in science [7]. At the end, like in a real international research collaboration, the participants 
join a videoconference hosted at CERN or Fermilab to combine and discuss results and ask questions. The 
programme continues to broaden; special versions of IMC were developed recently, such as the International Day 
of Women and Girls in Science Masterclasses (IMC engaging young women in science) and Worldwide Data Day. 
7 
 
Moreover, the physics masterclasses website [11] offers a collection of educative materials on particle physics, 
which includes interactive elements, for example students’ exposure to real particle physics experimental data 
allowing students to make their own measurements, and understand particle physics “hands-on”. 
3. IPPOG Outreach Resource Database 
 
The richness of IPPOG’s expertise given the diversity of its members in terms of cultural and educational 
backgrounds, provides a perfect platform for sharing, developing and improving the explanatory and teaching 
materials, strategies, methods, activities and tools to reach broader audiences, based on the best practices in 
outreach and education of particle physics and related sciences. In its commitment to foster science 
dissemination, an online platform has been built to facilitate the exchange of particle physics education and 
outreach resources across the globe. IPPOG’s Resource Database (RDB) [37] is a collection of high quality engaging 
materials (e.g. videos, posters, talks, hands-on activities, tools, brochures and more) recommended by IPPOG 
representatives and contributors to help sharing the wonders and excitement of particle physics with teachers, 
students and the general public. The information available is readily understandable and regularly updated to 
reflect the latest discoveries in particle physics. Everything is freely available with the spirit of open access. The 
items are submitted to the database by IPPOG representatives, members of IPPOG Forum and group of trusted 
contributors. Anybody can request to become a new contributor and will be added to the group upon the approval 
from the IPPOG chairs.  
3.1. IPPOG Resource Database history 
 
The idea of the RDB was born in 2009 at an EPPOG meeting at CERN, when EPPOG after more than 15 years of its 
existence was on the verge of a transformation from a “discussion forum” to a possible world leader in outreach 
and informal scientific education activities for particle physics and related fields. Initially called the EPPOG Best 
Practice Database, it was meant to be used by science institutions and laboratories for outreach and informal 
science education purposes. The eventual aim was that the database would be self-sustaining, with the EPPOG 
members (and others) adding new items when appropriate and users “voting” to ensure that the highest quality 
and most useful items are the ones that become the “best practice” [38]. Consequently, the first version of the 
IPPOG’s Resource Database was released in 2011. 
 
3.2. New IPPOG website  
 
After almost 10 years, IPPOG is now embarking on an ambitious project to improve the user experience across 
the IPPOG digital portfolio (website and social media channels) and to strengthen the IPPOG brand online by 
creating a new website including a new RDB. The goal of the new design is to greatly broaden the audience type 
and use of the web pages and available resources. The visual impact needs to be enhanced in order to pursue 
IPPOG’s mission and communicate its messages to its existing and new audiences, as well as new potential 
members, partners and sponsors. IPPOG wants the new website to become more open to students, teachers and 
the general public, and for the RDB to become the primary source of particle physics outreach material in the 
world [39]. Comparison of current and new designs of IPPOG website are shown on Figures 2 and 3. Entry to RDB 
is possible from the main menu, but it is made prominent also at the front page (Figure 3). 
8 
 
 
Figure 2: View of the current IPPOG website (left) and Resource Database (right) [5]  
 
 
Figure 3: Design of the new IPPOG website in development. The entry to RDB is made prominent at the front 
page.  
 
Considerable efforts are invested in the review and redesign of the RDB, which will also benefit from the visual 
upgrade (see Figure 4). 
 
9 
 
 
Figure 4: Design of the new IPPOG Resource Database in development. When you hover over one of the main 
4 categories (images on the top), green window with corresponding subcategories appears (here for category 
“Matter, particles and universe”). 
 
3.3. The new IPPOG Resource Database 
 
Currently there are almost 400 items in RDB which are filtered by topics, item types, target audiences and 
language. Users can choose among 44 physics topics (from particles and their interactions through dark matter, 
extra-dimensions to detectors and accelerators), 41 item types (e.g. video, poster, lesson plan, etc.) (see Figure 5 
and [37]). 
For several years discussions within IPPOG were considering how to improve the functionality, keep the content 
up-to-date and provide the full range coverage of relevant physics topics. As a result of the IPPOG Web working 
group efforts over many years and numerous consultations with science communication experts and 
representatives of the IPPOG target audiences the proposal of a new RDB has been developed [39]. A large 
number of categories, item types and audience types have been collapsed to fewer more targeted ones (see 
Figure 5) and a more user-friendly way of navigating and search was proposed [39]. These have been approved 
by the IPPOG community and teachers. As shown on Figure 4, when the RDB page is entered, one would see 
images on the top corresponding to the main four physics topics, while the search filter is located below on the 
right hand side. When one hovers over the one of images, the green window with images of the corresponding 
subcategories appears. The main idea is that one can search by a filter, but also use the quick search by topics by 
clicking directly on the images on the top, while at every step there is a possibility to refine the search using the 
filter on the side, which always remains in view.  
 
10 
 
 
Figure 5: New categories of IPPOG Resource Database. 
 
Taking into consideration that teachers and educational specialists are the primary audience of RDB, since 2017 
IPPOG has worked closely with two groups of physics teachers attending the international high school teachers 
programme at CERN [23]. They reviewed and evaluated a large number of materials, proposed new tags, helped 
to determine the structure, interface and workflow. A nice “spin-off” from working with teachers was the creation 
of the group “IPPOG Friends”, a group of physics teachers interested to learn about IPPOG related activities, take 
part and disseminate them among their colleagues and students.  
Nine years after the creation of the RDB, IPPOG has created an official RDB curation group, including teachers, 
scientists and science educators from 15 countries, 3 experiments and CERN. They are reviewing the RDB content 
and reorganising it according to new categorisation. Many new items are being collected at the same time in 
order to provide the most comprehensive and up-to-date collection of outreach and educational materials in 
particle physics and related sciences worldwide.  
Even though most of the resources are in English, thanks to the large international representation of IPPOG, the 
materials spans 24 languages. In the future we aim to work on translation of the most recommended materials 
to various languages. The curation group will also identify IPPOG’s best resources that will always appear at the 
top of the search results. Based on the request from teachers, a new tag ‘school topic’ is added, which helps 
teachers to identify where in their classical physics curriculum they can use the particular resource. The creation 
of the list of school classroom topics linking to respective particle physics topics is a very useful tool being now 
developed by IPPOG. Another new tag is the possibility to use the resource also for online educating.  
3.4. Target audiences (who can find what?) 
 
The first primary group of IPPOG RDB users (particle physics and scientific community active in outreach and 
education) are expected to seek the materials in support of their own particle physics outreach projects and 
inspiration (e.g. for public talks). The second primary group, teachers and educators, are expected to find the 
extra-curricular activities, lesson plans or projects for the classroom, and even the materials to inspire young 
students and motivate them to study STEM subjects and become scientifically aware citizens. Curious students 
will find materials or activities in particle physics and related sciences complementary to what they are being 
taught at school.  
11 
 
Good examples of useful resources for the high school physics teacher are instructions how to build a simple cloud 
chamber [40], a 3-D printed scattering experiment [41], a Particle Builder board game [42] or a multilingual poster 
describing the elementary constituents of matter [43]. A four-piece series of particle physics teaching materials 
[15], and in particular the main volume “Charges, Interactions and Particles” [16, 17] which covers the essential 
knowledge about the Standard Model by using an innovative approach tailored around the concept of charge and 
pointing out connections to typical contents of school physics curricula, is very popular with thousands of German 
teachers. Even primary school teachers can find an inspiration, e.g. with CERN training programme Playing with 
Protons [44]. 
If you are a scientist invited to give a public talk on the Higgs boson and other intriguing questions in particle 
physics, you might be inspired by different talks [45], presentations and other materials, e.g. the Higgs boson 
comic book and video animation [46]. When you are confronted by media or people with negative attitude 
towards science, you might want to look at the presentation discussing the impact of fundamental research on 
society showcased by particle physics [47]. 
 
3.5. Bringing particle physics closer to society 
 
Particle physics has not only revolutionized the way we look at the universe, but along the way, it has made 
significant impacts on other fields of science. As a key driver of innovation through its countless applications, it 
has improved the daily life for people around the world, showing particle physics is a science in service of mankind. 
A new generation of scientists and computing professionals has been trained, and science for peace initiatives led 
especially by CERN are representing the DNA of the open collaborative spirit within particle physics. 
It is important to involve also these lesser known aspects of fundamental research in teaching and outreach 
activities. “Many people are not aware that behind all innovations, there is science. I wasn't aware of most of the 
inventions coming from CERN, which are currently essential for our everyday lives.”, claim high school students 
attending the Creating Ambassadors for Science in Society event [4]. Understanding what is the direct impact of 
particle physics and fundamental research on everyday life is important in shaping the perception and relation to 
physics and science as such and even a motivating factor for undertaking physics studies: “We understood that 
physics plays a relevant role in today’s technologies and it will do so even more in the future.  Its applications, such 
as hadron therapy among others, fascinated and encouraged us to study and continue our college education up 
to completing a Ph.D.” as shown in the testimonial from winners of ‘Girls, do physics!’ IPPOG’s campaign [34]. 
 
 
Figure 6: Why particle physics matters [48], Illustration by Sandbox Studio, Chicago  
 
In this direction, IPPOG offers today for example a Masterclass on hadron therapy [49] and a small number of 
other resources [47], but many more are being prepared.  
An important new part of the RDB will be the category “Particle physics and society”, which will be filled with new 
useful tools for our audiences which are being prepared thanks to the efforts of the IPPOG working groups.  
12 
 
The working group on “Outreach of Applications for Society” identified the need for engaging stories with a human 
touch since they can be the most impactful and effective way to communicate to the public successful applications 
for the benefit of society from fundamental research and physics in particular. Its aim is to offer short stories with 
clear messages connecting science to everyday lives of citizens and make them available through the IPPOG web 
page and resource database. The goal is to also show through them the importance of fundamental research and 
related sciences for global sustainable development and to inspire the young generation. These stories should 
provide a powerful tool when approaching different non-scientifically educated citizens realizing that in addition 
to the quest for knowledge and satisfying curiosity, there is a growing pressure from taxpayers for the justification 
of fundamental research funding requesting tangible examples of return to society. 
After collecting materials, from the CERN knowledge transfer collection to individual contributions, the working 
group works on story-building around available facts, while trying to find a human touch and anecdotes in each 
one of them. Almost everybody knows the story behind the World Wide Web. We plan to offer more stories, 
behind many applications, working currently on subjects like PET and IRM scanners, cancer therapy, touch screen, 
GPS, UNOSAT and many more little known even within the scientific community. 
Another IPPOG working group is regularly discussing how to explain complex particle physics hot topics to lay 
audience. The highlights of the discussions in recent years include how to best explain the Higgs mechanism, spin, 
particle-wave duality or gravitational waves. However, also questions such as “how to communicate the 
importance of precision”, “what if no new discovery / Higgs – what now?”, “what is the meaning of theory in 
science compared to its meaning for the broad public at large” or “how to sell a new European Strategy for Particle 
Physics and how to justify the costs of always-bigger machines (HL-LHC, ILC, FCC)” have been tackled. In 2019 
work started on collecting the best IPPOG recommended explanations, analogies, metaphors and examples on 
how to explain complex particle physics issues to the public. All the categories in IPPOG’s resource database are 
planned to be addressed. Arguments that can be used when talking to media or decision makers, when they 
question the funding of research projects and its relevance, will be included in the “Particle Physics and Society” 
part of the RDB. The scientific outreach community and everybody who wants to explain these issues to the public, 
students and politicians or to convince media and decision makers why particle physics and fundamental research 
matters, will find this to be a powerful tool.  
 
Conclusions 
 
Threatened financial support for large experimental endeavors, falling interest of young people to engage in 
studies of STEM, especially physics, and mistrust in science are the main challenges the scientific community is 
faced with currently. These are based on the misperception of science, especially physics and basic research in 
society. This attitude towards physics by non-scientific audiences is largely caused by the scarce exposure of 
society to modern physics, which is in most cases not included in school curricula. Introducing particle physics and 
related sciences to students and the public, while showing the current state of art of contemporary physics and 
bringing the understanding of the world we live in and its technologies, is of vital importance. Before the update 
of physics school curricula is achieved, the science outreach and extra-curriculum activities are the only possibility 
to bridge the gap between contemporary scientific research and science education at schools and thus the 
awareness of modern science by society. The International Particle Physics Outreach Group (IPPOG) has been 
making concerted and systematic efforts to present and popularise particle physics across all audiences and age 
groups for more than two decades by developing suitable methods, tools and activities. Today the scientific 
community has in IPPOG a strategic pillar to aid the fostering of long-term, sustainable support for fundamental 
research around the world. One of the main tools IPPOG has been offering the scientific community, teachers and 
educators for almost 10 years is the Resource Database (RDB), an online platform containing a collection of high 
quality engaging education and outreach materials in particle physics and related sciences. Today IPPOG is 
investing considerable efforts in redesigning the RDB with the aim for it to become the primary source of particle 
physics outreach material in the world. At the same time, new content for the RDB is being prepared, with the 
aim to provide a powerful tool for the scientific community to shape the attitude and perception of physics and 
fundamental research by decision makers, funding bodies and the public, and to motivate young people to 
undertake physics studies.  
 
13 
 
Acknowledgement 
Author wishes to express gratitude to Dezso Horvath for encouragement, comments and help in producing the 
final version of this article. 
 
References 
 
[1] https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs  
[2] https://bangkok.unesco.org/content/girls-education-stem-facts  
[3] M.Vollmer, "Unschuldige Physik", Physikalische Blatter 56, Volume 6, Wiley-Vch,Weinheim 2000 
[4] Creating Ambassadors for Science in Society event: http://indico.cern.ch/event/736469/  
[5] International Particle Physics Outreach Group, http://ippog.org/  
[6] J. Walker, D. Halliday, R. Resnick, Fundamentals of physics—10th edition, John Wiley & Sons 2014, ISBN 978-
1-118-23072-5 (Extended edition); 
https://www.academia.edu/34844669/Fundamentals_of_Physics_10th_edition_Halliday_and_Resnick_pdf  
[7] M. Pietrocola, Upgrading Physics Education to Meet the Needs of Society, GIREP, SPRINGER Nature 
Switzerland, AG 2019, ISBN 978-3-319-96162-0; ISBN 978-3-319-96163-7 (eBook), https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-96163-7 
[8] Standard model of physics, https://cds.cern.ch/record/1997201?ln=fr  
[9] CERN shop, https://visit.cern/cern-shop  
[10] B. Crew, This Awesome Periodic Table Shows The Origins of Every Atom in Your Body, 
https://www.sciencealert.com/this-awesome-periodic-table-shows-the-origins-of-every-atom-in-your-body 
[11] IPPOG Physics Masterclasses, http://physicsmasterclasses.org/  
[12] Teaching materials (Materialien für Lehrkräfte), Netzwerk Teilchenwelt, TU Dresden, Institut für Kern- und 
Teilchenphysik, Dresden, Germany, https://www.teilchenwelt.de/material/materialien-fuer-lehrkraefte/ 
[13] M. Kobel, High school students' exposure to modern particle physics, Europhysics News Vol. 34, No. 3, 
2003, pp. 108-110, https://www.europhysicsnews.org/articles/epn/abs/2003/03/epn03307/epn03307.html 
[14] 2020 Update of the European Strategy for Particle Physics by the European Strategy Group, ISBN: 978-92-
9083-575-2 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.17181/ESU2020Deliberation 
[15]Unterrichtsmaterial Teilchenphysik, four-volume series of teaching material on particle physics developed 
by the Netzwerk Teilchenwelt (TU Dresden, Institut für Kern- und Teilchenphysik, Germany) in cooperation with 
the Joachim Herz Foundation: https://www.teilchenwelt.de/material/materialien-fuer-
lehrkraefte/unterrichtsmaterial-teilchenphysik/ 
Particle Physics Teaching Material: Charges, Interactions and Particles, 
http://ippog.org/resources/2020/particle-physics-teaching-material-charges-interactions-and-particles  
Particle Physics Teaching Material: Research Methods, http://ippog.org/resources/2020/particle-physics-
teaching-material-research-methods  
Particle Physics Teaching Material: Cosmic Rays, http://ippog.org/resources/2020/particle-physics-teaching-
material-cosmic-rays  
Particle Physics Teaching Material: Micro Courses, http://ippog.org/resources/2020/particle-physics-teaching-
material-micro-courses  
[16] M. Kobel, U. Bilow, P. Lindenau, B. Schorn, Particle Physics Teaching Material: Charges, 
Interactions and Particles (Unterrichtsmaterial Teilchenphysik: Ladungen, Wechselwirkungen und 
Teilchen), Joachim Herz Stiftung, 2018, http://ippog.org/resources/2020/particle-physics-teaching-material-
charges-interactions-and-particles 
                                                            
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                         
[17] P. Lindenau and M. Kobel, Introducing an innovative approach of teaching the Standard Model of particle 
physics at high school, IOP Publishing Ltd, Journal of Physics: Conference Series, Volume 1287, GIREP-MPTL 
2018 9–13 July 2018, San Sebastian, Spain, https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1742-
6596/1287/1/012045/meta 
https://ippog.web.cern.ch/resources/2020/teaching-standard-model-charges-and-interactions  
[18] G. J. Wiener, J. Woithe, A. Brown and K. Jende, Introducing the LHC in the classroom: an overview of 
education resources available, © 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd, Physics Education, Volume 51, Number 3  
[19] K. A. Tsokos, P. Hoeben, M. Headlee, Physics for the IB Diploma, 6th edition, Chapter 7.3; Cambridge 
University Press, 2014; ISBN: 1107628199,9781107628199; 
http://93.174.95.29/main/3020F410638982A8F68FC7513072FC28 
[20] J. Allum, Physics for the IB Diploma, second edition, Series: Eurostars, Chapter 7.3; Trans-Atlantic 
Publications, 2014, ISBN: 1471829049,9781471829048; 
http://93.174.95.29/main/431F06C35BDB1548DC1FF8FB997D3F05 
[21] M. Bowen-Jones, D. Homer, IB Physics Course Book: 2014 Edition: Oxford IB Diploma Program, Chapter 7, 
Oxford University Press, 2014; ISBN: 0198392133,9780198392132; 
http://93.174.95.29/main/262B457615B2B3420277AE52913C22E8 
[22] https://www.ibo.org/  
[23] https://teacher-programmes.web.cern.ch/  
[24] https://scoollab.web.cern.ch/  
[25] International Cosmic Day, https://icd.desy.de/  
[26] International Muon Week, https://quarknet.org/content/international-muon-week  
[27] EPPOG Meeting Minutes 19 September, 1997, CERN 
[28] IPPOG Collaboration, Future Challenges in Particle Physics Education and Outreach, (18 December 2018) 
https://indico.cern.ch/event/765096/contributions/3295747/attachments/1785273/2906293/EPPSU_IPPOG_fi
nal.pdf 
[29] H.P. Beck, Reaching out in the era of big science, viewpoint in CERN Courier, 
https://cerncourier.com/a/viewpoint-reaching-out-in-the-era-of-big-science/ 
[30] Global Cosmic Ray studies https://icd.desy.de/e49245/  
[31] Music Festival in Czech Republic, Colours of Ostrava, https://www.colours.cz/  
[32] Universal Science Festival, https://universalscience.web.cern.ch/  
[33] Particles4U, IPPOG competition 2018, http://ippog.org/particles4u  
[34] Girls, do physics!, IPPOG campaign and competition, https://ippogorg.wixsite.com/girlsdophysics  
[35] Cascade Competitions UK, 
https://www.birmingham.ac.uk/schools/physics/outreach/secondaryschools/cascade.aspx  
[36] Cascade Competitions Slovakia, https://fyzika.uniza.sk/cascade/  
[37] IPPOG Resource Database: http://ippog.org/resources  
[38] L. McCarthy, M. Kobel, D. Barney, EPPOG à IPPOG: An Evolution of Particle Physics Outreach (14 October 
2010), 
https://indico.cern.ch/event/107976/contributions/1309725/attachments/24972/35951/EPPOG_IPPOG_MKan
dLMandDBv4.pdf 
[39] B. Bruant Gulejova, New IPPOG Website Design and Development, Technical Specification, February 2019, 
https://cds.cern.ch/record/2719227  
[40] CERN S’Cool LAB, Cloud chamber DIY manual, http://ippog.org/resources/2016/cloud-chamber-diy-manual  
15 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                         
[41] CERN S’Cool LAB, 3D printable scattering experiment, http://ippog.org/resources/2020/3d-printable-
scattering-experiment  
[42] CERN S'Cool LAB, Particle builder Board Game, https://ippog.web.cern.ch/resources/2020/particle-builder-
board-game  
[43] Working group lead by N. Arnaud, LAL, CNRS/IN2P3 and Université Paris-Sud, Multilingual poster about the 
elementary constituents of matter, http://ippog.org/resources/2015/multilingual-poster-about-elementary-
constituents-matter  
[44]  A. Alexopoulos, M. Pavlidou, S. Cherouvis, 2019, 'Playing with Protons': a training course for primary school 
teachers at CERN, Physics Education, 54(1), 015013, © 2018 IOP Publishing Ltd, 
https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1361-6552/aae7a4 
http://ippog.org/resources/2020/playing-protons 
[45] S. Goldfarb, Hidden Pieces: The LHC and our Dark Universe, public presentation on current particle physics 
research at the LHC, http://ippog.org/resources/2020/hidden-pieces-lhc-and-our-dark-universe  
[46] J. Cham, PhD TV: Higgs boson explained, comic book and video animation, 
http://ippog.org/resources/2012/phd-tv-higgs-boson-explained  
[47] B. Bruant Gulejova, Impact on society and sustainable development showcased by particle physics and 
CERN, presentation at CERN international high school teachers’ programme 2017, 
https://indico.cern.ch/event/572852/contributions/2639248/attachments/1491684/2318975/Impact_on_socie
ty_and_sustainable_development_HST_2017_BBG.pdf  
https://ippog.web.cern.ch/resources/2020/impact-science-society-and-sustainable-development-showcased-
particle-physics-and  
[48] K. Tuttle, Why particle physics matters, Symmetry magazine, October 2013, 
https://www.symmetrymagazine.org/article/october-2013/why-particle-physics-matters  
[49] IPPOG Physics Masterclasses on Hadron Therapy; https://indico.cern.ch/event/840212/  
